Abstract The emergency services architecture developed in the IETF Emergency Context Resolution with Internet Technology (ECRIT) working group describes an architecture where location information is provided by access networks to endpoints or Voice over IP (VoIP) service providers in order to determine the correct dial string and information to route the call to a Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP).
To determine the PSAP Uniform Resource Identifier (URI), the usage of the Location to Service Translation (LoST) protocol is envisioned.
This document provides a problem statement and lists requirements for situations where the Internet Access Provider (IAP) and/or the Internet Service Provider (ISP) are only willing to disclose limited or no location information.
The emergency services architecture developed in the IETF Emergency Context Resolution with Internet Technology (ECRIT) working group, see [RFC6443], describes an architecture where location information is provided by access networks to endpoints or VoIP service providers in order to determine the correct dial string and information to route the call to a Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP).
The Location to Service Translation (LoST) protocol [RFC5222] allows callers and other call routing entities to determine the PSAP Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) for a specific geographical location together with a service URN [RFC5031].
The basic architecture is shown in Figure 1 of [RFC6443] and further detailed in the message flow in Figure 2 of [RFC6443].
For emergency services, location information is needed for three purposes: 1.
Emergency call routing to the PSAP that is responsible for a specific geographical region.
Dispatch of the emergency personnel to the scene of an accident, crime, or other type of incident.
Additionally, a Voice Service Provider (VSP) may need to verify that a call is indeed an emergency call and may therefore require location information to ensure that calls routed to a specific URI point to a PSAP.
This document focuses on items (1) and (3).
Providing location information by the ISP to emergency authorities, including PSAPs, regional emergency management association, and emergency personnel is typically a legal obligation covered by regulatory frameworks.
Location Hiding Internet Access Providers (IAPs) and Internet Service Providers (ISPs) typically have little incentive to provide location information to end hosts or independent VSPs (without monetary compensation) for any purpose, including for emergency call routing.
The decision to deny disclosure of location information can be driven by a number of technical and business concerns.
Some providers may perceive a risk that allowing users to access location information for non emergency purposes or prior to an emergency call will incur additional server load and thus costs.
Other providers may not want to make location information available without the ability to charge for it.
Yet, others fear problems with regard to privacy when disclosing location information to potentially unknown third parties.
The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119], with the important qualification that, unless otherwise stated, these terms apply to the design of an solution supporting location hiding, not its implementation or application.
This document reuses terminology from [RFC5687].
:   There MUST be a way for the ISP/IAP to withhold precise location information from the endpoint and from the VSP.
The ISP/IAP MUST support the ability of the endpoint or the VSP to route emergency calls.
The VSP MUST be able to validate that a call purported to be an emergency call is being routed to a bona fide URI, which is denoted by being a URI in LoST for the designated emergency service.
This requirement is provided to deal with potential security problems described in Section 5.1 of [RFC5069].
The PSAP MUST receive precise location information (by value) about emergency callers.
As such, any solution MUST be able to provide location information to the PSAP even while withholding it from the emergency caller.
The proposed solution MUST NOT assume a business or trust relationship between the caller's VSP and the caller's ISP.
A solution MUST consider deployment scenarios where a VSP does not operate in the same jurisdiction as the PSAP.
The solution MUST consider that service boundaries for the various emergency services responsible for a particular location may differ.
The steps needed by the endpoint for emergency calling SHOULD be no different when location is withheld versus when location is not withheld.
In particular, user agents cannot require additional configuration to discover in which particular environment (hiding or no hiding) they find themselves.
The solution SHOULD work without the ISP/IAP having to support SIP and without the need to utilize SIP between the endpoint and the VSP.
The solution MUST work if PSAP boundaries have holes.
(For a discussion about holes in PSAP boundaries and their encoding, the reader is referred to [RFC5964].)
The solution MUST NOT assume the existence of Emergency Service Routing Proxies (ESRPs) per country, state, and city.
The solution MUST consider that service boundaries for different emergency services may differ, but they overlap at the location of the caller.
Though the solution MAY add steps to the emergency call routing process described in [RFC6443], these steps MUST NOT significantly increase call setup latency.
For example, the revised process MUST NOT include "trial and error" operations on its critical path, such as attempts at LbyR resolutions that may take time to time out.
The solution MUST allow the end host to determine PSAP/ESRP URLs prior to the call, for all emergency services.
The solution MUST allow user agents (UAs) to discover at least their dial string ahead of the emergency call.
The solution MUST have minimal impact on UAs, i.e., a solution is preferred if it does not require a substantially different emergency service procedure compared to the procedure of dealing with emergency services where no location hiding is applied.
The solution MUST NOT interfere with the use of LoST for non emergency services.
The solution MUST allow emergency calls to reach an IP to  PSTN gateway rather than the IP based PSAP directly.
The solution MUST NOT shift effort (externality), i.e., the convenience of the location hiding ISP MUST NOT impose a burden on user agents or non hiding ISPs/IAPs and SHOULD NOT impose a burden on VSPs.
The solution SHOULD minimize the impact on LoST, SIP conveyance [RFC6442], and DHCP.
The solution SHOULD NOT break in the presence of NATs and SHOULD consider the presence of legacy devices, as described in [RFC5687].
This document does not raise additional security consideration beyond those mentioned in [RFC5687] and discussed in this document.
