Root Zone Evolution Review Committee Abstract
This memo outlines the process by which the IETF makes an appointment to the ICANN Root Zone Evolution Review Committee (RZERC).
The ICANN Root Zone Evolution Review Committee (RZERC) reviews proposed architectural changes to the content of the DNS root zone, the systems including both hardware and software components used in executing changes to the DNS root zone, and the mechanisms used for distribution of the DNS root zone, and makes recommendations to the ICANN Board.
As stipulated in [RZERC Charter], the IETF is called upon to name its delegate to the committee.
The IAB will select one person for a one year term.
This appointment can be renewed for up to three additional one year terms.
This memo outlines the process by which the IETF makes that selection.
In brief, this document describes the timeframe and procedures for the IAB to solicit public input and make a selection for the open position.
Desirable Qualifications for an IETF Nominated RZERC Member Candidates for the RZERC should have a demonstrable involvement in the IETF with a particular focus on active participation in IETF Working Groups.
The candidate is expected to possess clearly demonstrated technical competence in Internet technology relating to the DNS root zone and be able to articulate those technology issues such that the ICANN Board can be provided with sound technical perspectives.
The candidate is also expected to be able to understand the respective roles and responsibilities of the IETF and ICANN and be able to articulate these roles within both organizational communities.
The candidate will be a representative or a delegate of the IETF.
It is expected that the candidate would be able to call on experts in the IETF community as required, to ensure that the ICANN Board receives the highest quality technical advice available.
IETF Nominated RZERC Member Selection Process 3.1.
The IETF appointment to the RZERC will serve a one year term.
This appointment can be renewed for up to three additional one year terms.
In cases when the incumbent is willing to serve for an additional term and has not yet exceeded the term limits described above, the IAB may ask the IETF community for feedback on the incumbent to find out whether it is necessary to run a full selection process.
If the IAB determines that it is not necessary to run a full selection process, the incumbent may be reappointed by the IAB for another year.
Except in cases when the IAB has decided to reappoint the incumbent, each year, the IAB will make a public call for nominations on the IETF Announce <ietf announce@ietf.org> mailing list.
The public call will specify the manner by which nominations will be accepted and the means by which the list of nominees will be published.
The call for nominations will also include the expected workload for the position, as provided by the current IETF appointed RZERC member.
Along with the name and contact information for each candidate, details about the candidate's background and qualifications for the position should be attached to the nomination.
All IETF participants are eligible for nomination.
While IETF NomCom members, IAB members, IAOC members, and IESG members are eligible, the IAB will balance time constraints and potential conflicts of interest from those members in its consideration of nominees.
IAB members who accept a nomination will recuse themselves from selection discussions.
The IAB will publish the list of nominated persons, review the material, and make a selection.
The IAB will consider potential conflicts with a position on the ICANN RZERC and any other ICANN committees supported by nominated candidates.
The IAB expects to seat new RZERC members in time for ICANN's annual general meeting in Q4 of each year.
Basic timeframe requirements for the IETF process are as follows:  4 6 weeks for solicitation of nominations or review of incumbent  4 6 weeks for review of nominees, deliberation, and selection
In Q2 of each year, the IAB will announce the specific dates for the RZERC selection process for that year (taking into account the particular dates of IETF and ICANN meetings, etc.)
This document describes the process for the general, annual appointment of RZERC members to fill the seats of members whose terms are ending.
However, if an IETF appointed member of the RZERC is unable to serve his or her full term, the IAB may, at its discretion, immediately select a replacement to serve the remainder of the term using the interim process defined in Section 3.5.1.
If the IAB does not invoke the interim process, the next annual selection process will fill the vacancy.
If the IAB elects to fill the mid term vacancy before the next annual selection, a separate timeline will be announced and the rest of the process described in this document will be followed.
This document does not require any IANA actions.
This document does not describe any technical protocols and has no implications for network security.
IAB Members at the Time of Approval Jari Arkko Ralph Droms Ted Hardie Joe Hildebrand Russ Housley Lee Howard Erik Nordmark Robert Sparks
Andrew Sullivan Dave Thaler Martin Thomson Brian Trammell Suzanne Woolf
