Abstract The BGP Monitoring Protocol (BMP) only defines access to the Adj RIB  In Routing Information Bases (RIBs).
This document updates BMP (RFC 7854) by adding access to the Adj RIB Out RIBs.
It also adds a new flag to the peer header to distinguish between Adj RIB In and Adj
The BGP Monitoring Protocol (BMP) defines monitoring of the received (e.g., Adj RIB In)
Routing Information Bases (RIBs) per peer.
The pre policy Adj RIB
In conveys to a BMP receiver all RIB data before any policy has been applied.
The post policy Adj RIB
In conveys to a BMP receiver all RIB data after policy filters and/or modifications have been applied.
An example of pre policy versus post policy is when an inbound policy applies attribute modification or filters.
Pre policy would contain information prior to the inbound policy changes or filters of data.
Post policy would convey the changed data or would not contain the filtered data.
Monitoring the received updates that the router received before any policy has been applied is the primary level of monitoring for most use cases.
Inbound policy validation and auditing are the primary use cases for enabling post policy monitoring.
In order for a BMP receiver to receive any BGP data, the BMP sender (e.g., router) needs to have an established BGP peering session and actively be receiving updates for an Adj RIB In.
Being able to only monitor the Adj RIB
In puts a restriction on what data is available to BMP receivers via BMP senders (e.g., routers).
This is an issue when the receiving end of the BGP peer is not enabled for BMP or when it is not accessible for administrative reasons.
For example, a service provider advertises prefixes to a customer, but the service provider cannot see what it advertises via BMP.
Asking the customer to enable BMP and monitoring of the Adj
BMP [RFC7854] only defines Adj RIB
In being sent to BMP receivers.
This document updates the per peer header defined in Section 4.2 of [RFC7854] by adding a new flag to distinguish between Adj RIB In and Adj RIB Out.
BMP senders use the new flag to send either Adj RIB In or Adj RIB Out.
Adding Adj RIB Out provides the ability for a BMP sender to send to BMP receivers what it advertises to BGP peers, which can be used for outbound policy validation and to monitor routes that were advertised.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
As defined in [RFC4271], "The Adj RIBs Out contains the routes for advertisement to specific peers by means of the local speaker's UPDATE messages."
Pre policy Adj RIB Out The result before applying the outbound policy to an Adj RIB Out.
This normally would match what is in the local RIB.
Out The result of applying outbound policy to an Adj RIB Out.
This MUST convey to the BMP receiver what is actually transmitted to the peer.
The per peer header has the same structure and flags as defined in Section 4.2 of [RFC7854] with the addition of the O flag as shown here: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7    V L
The O flag indicates Adj RIB
In if set to 0 and Adj RIB
Out if set to 1.
The existing flags are defined in Section 4.2 of [RFC7854], and the remaining bits are reserved for future use.
They MUST be transmitted as 0, and their values MUST be ignored on receipt.
The remote IP address associated with the TCP session over which the encapsulated Protocol Data Unit (PDU) is sent.
The Autonomous System number of the peer to which the encapsulated PDU is sent.
The BGP Identifier of the peer to which the encapsulated PDU is sent.
The time when the encapsulated routes were advertised (one may also think of this as the time when they were installed in the Adj RIB Out), expressed in seconds and microseconds since midnight (zero hour), January 1, 1970 (UTC).
If zero, the time is unavailable.
Precision of the timestamp is implementation  dependent.
The primary use case in monitoring Adj RIB Out is to monitor the updates transmitted to a BGP peer after outbound policy has been applied.
These updates reflect the result after modifications and filters have been applied (e.g., post policy Adj RIB Out).
Some attributes are set when the BGP message is transmitted, such as next hop.
Post policy Adj RIB Out MUST convey to the BMP receiver what is actually transmitted to the peer.
The L flag MUST be set to 1 to indicate post policy.
Pre policy Similar to Adj RIB
In policy validation, pre policy Adj RIB Out can be used to validate and audit outbound policies.
For example, a comparison between pre policy and post policy can be used to validate the outbound policy.
Depending on the BGP peering session type   Internal BGP (IBGP), IBGP route reflector client, External BGP (EBGP), BGP confederations, route server client   the candidate routes that make up the pre  policy Adj RIB Out do not contain all local RIB routes.
only routes that are available based on the peering type.
Post policy represents the filtered/changed routes from the available routes.
Some attributes are set only during transmission of the BGP message, i.e., post policy.
It is common that the next hop may be null, loopback, or similar during the pre policy phase.
All mandatory attributes, such as next hop, MUST be either zero or have an empty length if they are unknown at the pre policy phase completion.
The BMP receiver will treat zero or empty mandatory attributes as self  originated.
The L flag MUST be set to 0 to indicate pre policy.
Many BMP messages have a per peer header, but some are not applicable to Adj RIB
In or Adj RIB Out monitoring, such as Peer Up and Down Notifications.
Unless otherwise defined, the O flag should be set to 0 in the per peer header in BMP messages.
Route Monitoring and Route Mirroring
The O flag MUST be set accordingly to indicate if the route monitor or route mirroring message conveys Adj RIB In or Adj RIB Out.
The Statistics Report message has a Stat Type field to indicate the statistic carried in the Stat Data field.
Statistics report messages are not specific to Adj
RIB In or Adj RIB
Out and MUST have the O flag set to zero.
The O flag SHOULD be ignored by the BMP receiver.
This statistics type is 64 bit Gauge.
: Number of routes in post policy Adj RIB Out.
This statistics type is 64 bit Gauge.
: Number of routes in per AFI/SAFI pre
The value is structured as: 2 byte Address Family Identifier (AFI), 1 byte Subsequent Address Family Identifier (SAFI), followed by a 64 bit Gauge.
: Number of routes in per AFI/SAFI post policy Adj  RIB Out.
The value is structured as: 2 byte Address Family Identifier (AFI), 1 byte Subsequent Address Family Identifier (SAFI), followed by a 64 bit Gauge.
Down Notifications convey BGP peering session state to BMP receivers.
The state is independent of whether or not route monitoring or route mirroring messages will be sent for Adj RIB In, Adj RIB Out, or both.
BMP receiver implementations SHOULD ignore the O flag in Peer Up and Down Notifications.
The Information field contains a free form UTF 8 string whose byte length is given by the Information Length field.
The value is administratively assigned.
There is no requirement to terminate the string with null or any other character.
Multiple Admin Labels can be included in the Peer Up Notification.
When multiple Admin Labels are included, the BMP receiver MUST preserve their order.
The Admin Label is optional.
Peer and Update Groups Peer and update groups are used to group updates shared by many peers.
This is a level of efficiency in implementations, not a true representation of what is conveyed to a peer in either pre policy or post policy.
One of the use cases to monitor post policy Adj RIB Out is to validate and continually ensure the egress updates match what is expected.
For example, wholesale peers should never have routes with community X:
In this use case, there may be hundreds of wholesale peers, but a single peer could have represented the group.
From a BMP perspective, it should be simple to include a group name in the Peer Up, but it is more complex than that.
BGP implementations have evolved to provide comprehensive and structured policy grouping, such as session, AFI/SAFI, and template based group policy inheritances.
This level of structure and inheritance of polices does not provide a simple peer group name or ID, such as wholesale peer.
This document defines a new Admin Label type for Peer Up Information TLVs (Section 6.3.1) that can be used instead of requiring a group name.
These labels have administrative scope relevance.
For example, labels "type wholesale" and "region west" could be used to monitor expected policies.
Configuration and assignment of labels to peers are BGP implementation specific.
Changes to Existing BMP Session
In case of any change that results in the alteration of behavior of an existing BMP session (i.e., changes to filtering and table names), the session MUST be bounced with a Peer Down/Peer Up sequence.
The considerations in Section 11 of [RFC7854] apply to this document.
Implementations of this protocol SHOULD require establishing sessions with authorized and trusted monitoring devices.
It is also believed that this document does not add any additional security considerations.
IANA Considerations IANA has assigned the following new parameters to the "BGP Monitoring Protocol (BMP) Parameters" registry (https://www.iana.org/assignments/bmp parameters/).
: Addition to the "BMP Peer Flags" Registry 9.2.
Additions to BMP Statistics Types Registry
IANA has made the following assignment for the four statistics types defined in Section 6.2 of this document:
SAFI pre policy Adj RIB
: Additions to the "BMP Statistics Types" Registry 9.3.
Addition to BMP Initiation Message TLVs Registry IANA has made the following assignment per Section 6.3.1 of this document:
Addition to the "BMP Initiation Message TLVs" Registry Contributors
