Abstract Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) is a style sheet language for the World Wide Web.
CSS style sheets have been in use since October 1995 using the Media Type text/css without registration; this memo seeks to regularize that position.
The World Wide Web Consortium has issued a Recommendation [1], which defines Cascading Style Sheets, level 1.
This memo provides information about the text/css Media Type.
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) is a style sheet language for the World Wide Web.
It describes the presentation (e.g. fonts, colors and spacing) of structured documents.
CSS is human readable and writable, and expresses style in common desktop publishing terminology.
CSS style sheets have been in use since October 1995 using the Media Type text/css without registration; this memo seeks to regularize that position.
A CSS style sheet can be either: (1) external the style sheet is linked to a document through a URI and exists as a separate object on the Web.
The media type text/css is used when fetching the object, for example in the Content Type and Accept header fields of HTTP [2].
(2) internal the style sheet is contained within the document.
A typical scenario is an HTML [3] document that contains a style sheet within the STYLE element.
Due to this close relationship, HTML and CSS share the same top level name ("text").
Subject: Registration of MIME media type
text/css MIME media type name:
css Required parameters: none Optional parameters
The syntax of CSS is expressed in US ASCII, but a CSS file can contain strings which may use any Unicode character.
Any charset that is a superset of US ASCII may be used; US ASCII, iso 8859
X and utf 8 are recommended.
Encoding considerations: For use with transports that are not 8 bit clean, quoted  printable encoding is recommended since the majority of characters will be CSS syntax and thus US ASCII Security considerations:
Applying a style sheet to a document may hide information otherwise visible.
For example, a very small font size may be specified, or the display of certain document elements may be turned off.
CSS style sheets consist of declarative property/value pairs assigned to element selectors.
They contain no executable code.
As with HTML documents, CSS style sheets may contain links to other media (images, sounds, fonts, other style sheets) and those links are typically followed automatically by software, resulting in the transfer of files without the explicit request of the user for each one.
The security considerations of each linked file are those of the individual registered types.
Interoperability considerations: CSS has proven to be widely interoperable across computer platforms, across Web browsers of different makes, and for import and export in multiple authoring tools.
Published specification: see [1] Applications which use this media type:
CSS is device , platform  and vendor neutral and is supported by a wide range of Web user agents and authoring tools for formatting HTML and XML documents.
Additional information: Magic number(s): none File extension(s): .css
Macintosh File Type Code(s): "css " Object Identifier(s) or OID(s): none Person & email address to contact for further information:
The authors of this memo.
