Abstract This memo specifies how to incorporate International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) into CMS or S/MIME as an additional strong algorithm for symmetric encryption.
For organizations who make use of IDEA for data security purposes it is of high interest that IDEA is also available in S/MIME.
The intention of this memo is to provide the OIDs and algorithms required that IDEA can be included in S/MIME for symmetric content and key encryption.
This memo specifies how to incorporate International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) [IDEA] into CMS or S/MIME [SMIME2, SMIME3] as an additional strong algorithm for symmetric encryption.
For organizations who make use of IDEA for data security purposes it is of high interest that IDEA is also available in S/MIME.
The intention of this memo is to provide the OIDs and algorithms required that IDEA can be included in S/MIME for symmetric content and key encryption.
The general functional capabilities and preferences of S/MIME are specified by the registered list of S/MIME object identifiers (OIDs).
This list of OIDs is available from the Internet Mail Consortium at <
The set of S/MIME functions provided by a client is expressed by the S/MIME capabilities attribute.
This attribute contains a list of OIDs of supported cryptographic functions.
In this document, the terms MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD, and SHOULD NOT are used in capital letters.
This conforms to the definitions in [MUSTSHOULD].
Object Identifier for Content and Key Encryption
The Cryptographic Message Syntax [CMS], derived from PKCS#7 [PKCS7], is the framework for the implementation of cryptographic functions in S/MIME.
It specifies data formats and encryption processes without naming the cryptographic algorithms.
Each algorithm which is used for encryption purposes must be specified by a unique algorithm identifier.
For example, in the special case of content encryption the ContentEncryptionAlgorithmIdentifier specifies the algorithm to be applied.
However, according to [CMS] any symmetric encryption algorithm that a CMS implementation includes as a content encryption algorithm must also be included as a key encryption algorithm.
IDEA is added to the set of optional symmetric encryption algorithms in S/MIME by providing two unique object identifiers (OIDs).
One OID defines content encryption and the other one key encryption.
Thus an S/MIME agent can apply IDEA either for content or key encryption by selecting the corresponding object identifier, supplying the required parameter, and starting the program code.
For content encryption the use of IDEA in cipher block chaining (CBC) mode is recommended.
The key length is fixed to 128 bits.
} The identifier's parameters field contains the initialization vector (IV) as an optional parameter.
SEQUENCE { iv  OCTET STRING OPTIONAL }
If IV is specified as above, it MUST be used as initial vector.
In this case, the ciphertext MUST NOT include the initial vector.
If IV is not specified, the first 64 bits of the ciphertext MUST be considered as the initial vector.
However, this alternative of not including IV into "iv OCTET STRING" of IDEA
CBCPar SHOULD NOT be applied in CMS or S/MIME.
The key wrap/unwrap algorithms used to encrypt/decrypt an IDEA content encryption key with an IDEA key encryption key are specified in the following section.
Generation and distribution of IDEA key  encryption keys are beyond the scope of this document.
} The identifier's parameters field MUST be NULL.
In the following subsections IDEA key wrap and key unwrap algorithms are specified in conformance with [CMS], section 12.3.
The IDEA key wrap algorithm encrypts an IDEA content encryption key with an IDEA key encryption key.
The IDEA key wrap algorithm is defined by: 1.
Let the content encryption key (16 octets) be called CEK 2.
Compute an 8 octet key checksum value on CEK as described in [CMS], section 12.6.1, call the result ICV.
Let CEKICV :  CEK    ICV.
Generate 8 octets at random, call the result IV.
Encrypt CEKICV using IDEA in CBC mode and the key encryption key.
Use the random value generated in the previous step as the initialization vector (IV).
Reverse the order of the octets in TEMP2.
That is, the most significant (first) octet is swapped with the least significant (last) octet, and so on.
Encrypt TEMP3 using IDEA in CBC mode and
Use an initialization vector (IV) of 0x4adda22c79e82105.
The ciphertext is 32 octets long.
The IDEA key unwrap algorithm decrypts an IDEA content encryption key using an IDEA key encryption key.
The IDEA key unwrap algorithm is defined by: 1.
If the wrapped content encryption key is not 32 octets, then error.
Decrypt the wrapped content encryption key using IDEA in CBC mode with the key encryption key.
Use an initialization vector (IV) of 0x4adda22c79e82105.
Reverse the order of the octets in TEMP3.
That is, the most significant (first) octet is swapped with the least significant (last) octet, and so on.
Decompose the TEMP2 into IV and TEMP1.
IV is the most significant (first) 8 octets, and TEMP1 is the remaining (last) 24 octets.
Decrypt TEMP1 using IDEA in CBC mode with the key encryption key.
Use the IV value from the previous step as the initialization vector.
Decompose the CEKICV into CEK and ICV.
CEK is the most significant (first) 16 octets, and ICV is the least significant (last) 8 octets.
Compute an 8 octet key checksum value on CEK as described in [CMS], section 12.6.1.
If the computed key checksum value does not match the decrypted key checksum value, ICV, then error.
Use CEK as the content encryption key.
SMIMECapabilities Attribute An S/MIME client can announce the set of cryptographic functions it supports by using the S/MIME capabilities attribute as specified in [SMIME3].
This attribute provides a partial list of OIDs of cryptographic functions and must be signed by the client.
These OIDs should be logically separated in functional categories and MUST be ordered with respect to their preference.
If an S/MIME client is required to support symmetric encryption and key wrapping based on IDEA, the capabilities attribute MUST contain the above specified OIDs in the category of symmetric algorithms and key encipherment algorithms.
IDEA does not require additional OID parameters since it has a fixed key length of 128 bits.
The SMIMECapability SEQUENCE representing the IDEA symmetric encryption algorithm MUST include the IDEA CBC OID in the capabilityID field and the parameters field MUST be absent.
The SMIMECapability SEQUENCE for IDEA encryption SHOULD be included in the symmetric encryption algorithms portion of the SMIMECapabilities list.
The SMIMECapability SEQUENCE representing IDEA MUST be DER  encoded as follows:
The SMIMECapability SEQUENCE representing the IDEA key wrapping algorithm MUST include the id alg CMSIDEAwrap OID in the capabilityID field and the parameters field of KeyWrapAlgorithm MUST be absent.
The SMIMECapability SEQUENCE for IDEA key wrapping SHOULD be included in the key encipherment algorithms portion of the SMIMECapabilities list.
The SMIMECapability SEQUENCE representing IDEA key wrapping MUST be DER encoded as follows:
is id alg CMSIDEAwrap (no parameters) for IDEA key wrapping.
Activation of IDEA in S/MIME Clients When a sending agent creates an encrypted message, it has to decide which type of encryption algorithm to use.
In general the decision process involves information obtained from the capabilities lists included in messages received from the recipient, as well as other information such as private agreements, user preferences, legal restrictions, etc.
If users require IDEA for symmetric encryption, it must be supported by the S/MIME clients on both the sending and receiving side, and it must be set in the user preferences.
B. Comments on IDEA Security and Standards
The IDEA algorithm was developed in a joint project involving the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich (Dr. X. Lai and Prof. J.L. Massey) and Ascom Ltd.
The aim of the project was to develop a strong encryption algorithm that could replace the DES algorithm.
IDEA uses 128 bit secret keys and encrypts one 64 bit block at a time [IDEA].
It was particularly strengthened to protect against differential cryptoanalysis attacks.
For the full 8 round IDEA there is no attack known which is better than exhaustive search on the total 128 bit key space.
IDEA permits the implementation of standard Electronic Data Interchange applications.
It has been entered in the ISO/IEC register for encryption algorithms and incorporated in the "SECURITY GUIDE LINES" code list by the UNI/EDIFACT "SECURITY JOINT WORKING GROUP".
