Abstract This document defines a standard algorithm to temporarily postpone or "back off" link state IGP Shortest Path First (SPF) computations.
This reduces the computational load and churn on IGP nodes when multiple temporally close network events trigger multiple SPF computations.
Having one standard algorithm improves interoperability by reducing the probability and/or duration of transient forwarding loops during the IGP convergence when the IGP reacts to multiple temporally close IGP events.
Introduction Link state IGPs, such as IS IS [ISO10589], OSPF [RFC2328], and OSPFv3 [RFC5340], perform distributed route computation on all routers in the area/level.
In order to have consistent routing tables across the network, such distributed computation requires that all routers have the same version of the network topology (Link State Database (LSDB)) and perform their computation essentially at the same time.
In general, when the network is stable, there is a desire to trigger a new Shortest Path First (SPF) computation as soon as a failure is detected in order to quickly route around the failure.
However, when the network is experiencing multiple failures over a short period of time, there is a conflicting desire to limit the frequency of SPF computations, which would allow a reduction in control plane resources used by IGPs and all protocols/subsystems reacting to the attendant route change, such as LDP [RFC5036], RSVP TE [RFC3209], BGP [RFC4271], Fast Reroute computations (e.g.
, Loop Free Alternates (LFAs) [RFC5286]), FIB updates, etc.
This also reduces network churn and, in particular, reduces side effects (such as micro loops [RFC5715]) that ensue during IGP convergence.
To allow for this, IGPs usually implement an SPF Back Off Delay algorithm that postpones or backs off the SPF computation.
However, different implementations chose different algorithms.
Hence, in a multi vendor network, it's not possible to ensure that all routers trigger their SPF computation after the same delay.
This situation increases the average and maximum differential delay between routers completing their SPF computation.
It also increases the probability that different routers compute their FIBs based on different LSDB versions.
Both factors increase the probability and/or duration of micro loops as discussed in Section 8.
This document specifies a standard algorithm to allow multi vendor networks to have all routers delay their SPF computations for the same duration.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
The high level goals of this algorithm are the following:  very fast convergence for a single event (e.g., link failure),  paced fast convergence for multiple temporally close IGP events while IGP stability is considered acceptable,  delayed convergence when IGP stability is problematic (this will allow the IGP and related processes to conserve resources during the period of instability), and  avoidance of having different SPF DELAY timer values (Section 3) across different routers in the area/level.
This requires specific consideration as different routers may receive IGP messages at different intervals, or even in different orders, due to differences both in the distance from the originator of the IGP event and in flooding implementations.
IGP event: The reception or origination of an IGP LSDB change requiring a new routing table computation.
Some examples are a topology change, a prefix change, and a metric change on a link or prefix.
Note that locally triggering a routing table computation is not considered an IGP event since other IGP routers are unaware of this occurrence.
Routing table computation, in this document, is scoped to the IGP; so, this is the computation of the IGP RIB, performed by the IGP, using the IGP LSDB.
No distinction is made between the type of computation performed, e.g., full SPF, incremental SPF, or Partial Route Computation (PRC); the type of computation is a local consideration.
This document may interchangeably use the terms "routing table computation" and "SPF computation".
The delay between the first IGP event triggering a new routing table computation and the start of that routing table computation.
It can take the following values: INITIAL SPF DELAY:
A very small delay to quickly handle a single isolated link failure, e.g., 0 milliseconds.
A small delay to provide fast convergence in the case of a single component failure (such as a node failure or Shared Risk Link Group (SRLG) failure) that leads to multiple IGP events, e.g., 50 100 milliseconds.
A long delay when the IGP is unstable, e.g., 2 seconds.
Note that this allows the IGP network to stabilize.
This is the maximum duration typically needed to learn all the IGP events related to a single component failure (such as router failure or SRLG failure), e.g., 1 second.
It's mostly dependent on failure detection time variation between all routers that are adjacent to the failure.
Additionally, it may depend on the different IGP implementations/parameters across the network and their relation to the origination and flooding of link state advertisements.
The time required with no received IGP event before considering the IGP to be stable again and allowing the SPF DELAY to be restored to INITIAL SPF DELAY, e.g., a HOLDDOWN INTERVAL of 3 seconds.
The HOLDDOWN INTERVAL MUST be defaulted or configured to be longer than the TIME TO LEARN INTERVAL.
Principles of the SPF Delay Algorithm
For the first IGP event, we assume that there has been a single simple change in the network, which can be taken into account using a single routing computation (e.g., link failure, prefix (metric) change), and we optimize for very fast convergence by delaying the initial routing computation for a small interval, INITIAL SPF DELAY.
Under this assumption, there is no benefit in delaying the routing computation.
In a typical network, this is the most common type of IGP event.
Hence, it makes sense to optimize this case.
If subsequent IGP events are received in a short period of time (TIME TO LEARN INTERVAL), we then assume that a single component failed, but that this failure requires the knowledge of multiple IGP events in order for IGP routing to converge.
Under this assumption, we want fast convergence since this is a normal network situation.
However, there is a benefit in waiting for all IGP events related to this single component failure: the IGP can then compute the post  failure routing table in a single additional route computation.
In this situation, we delay the routing computation by SHORT SPF DELAY.
If IGP events are still received after TIME TO LEARN INTERVAL from the initial IGP event received in QUIET state (see Section 5.1), then the network is presumably experiencing multiple independent failures.
In this case, while waiting for network stability, the computations are delayed for a longer time, which is represented by LONG SPF DELAY.
This SPF delay is used until no IGP events are received for HOLDDOWN INTERVAL.
Note that in order to increase the consistency network wide, the algorithm uses a delay (TIME TO LEARN INTERVAL) from the initial IGP event rather than the number of SPF computations performed.
Indeed, as all routers may receive the IGP events at different times, we cannot assume that all routers will perform the same number of SPF computations.
For example, assuming that the SPF delay is 50 milliseconds, router R1 may receive three IGP events (E1, E2, E3) in those 50 milliseconds and hence will perform a single routing computation, while another router R2 may only receive two events (E1, E2) in those 50 milliseconds and hence will schedule another routing computation when receiving E3.
Specification of the SPF Delay State Machine
This section specifies the Finite State Machine (FSM) intended to control the timing of the execution of SPF calculations in response to IGP events.
The FSM is initialized to the QUIET state with all three timers (SPF TIMER, HOLDDOWN TIMER, and LEARN TIMER) deactivated.
The events that may change the FSM states are an IGP event or the expiration of one timer (SPF TIMER, HOLDDOWN TIMER, or LEARN TIMER).
The following diagram briefly describes the state transitions.
SPF TIMER expiration Figure 1: State Machine 5.2.
The naming and semantics of each state corresponds directly to the SPF delay used for IGP events received in that state.
This is the initial state, when no IGP events have occurred for at least HOLDDOWN INTERVAL since the last routing table computation.
The state is meant to handle link failures very quickly.
This is the state entered when an IGP event has been received in QUIET state.
This state is meant to handle a single component failure requiring multiple IGP events (e.g., node, SRLG).
This is the state reached after TIME TO LEARN INTERVAL in state SHORT WAIT.
This state is meant to handle multiple independent component failures during periods of IGP instability.
This is the FSM timer that uses the computed SPF delay.
Upon expiration, the routing table computation (as defined in Section 3) is performed.
This is the FSM timer that is (re)started when an IGP event is received and set to HOLDDOWN INTERVAL.
Upon expiration, the FSM is moved to the QUIET state.
This is the FSM timer that is started when an IGP event is received while the FSM is in the QUIET state.
Upon expiration, the FSM is moved to the LONG WAIT state.
This section describes the events and the actions performed in response.
Transition 1: IGP event while in QUIET state Actions on event 1:
If SPF TIMER is not already running, start it with value INITIAL SPF DELAY.
LEARN TIMER with TIME TO LEARN INTERVAL.
Start HOLDDOWN TIMER with HOLDDOWN INTERVAL.
Transition to SHORT WAIT state.
Transition 2: IGP event while in SHORT WAIT Actions on event 2:  Reset HOLDDOWN TIMER to HOLDDOWN INTERVAL.
If SPF TIMER is not already running, start it with value SHORT SPF DELAY.
LEARN TIMER expiration Actions on event 3:
Transition to LONG WAIT state.
IGP event while in LONG WAIT Actions on event 4:  Reset HOLDDOWN TIMER to HOLDDOWN INTERVAL.
If SPF TIMER is not already running, start it with value LONG SPF DELAY.
HOLDDOWN TIMER expiration while in LONG WAIT Actions on event 5:
HOLDDOWN TIMER expiration while in SHORT WAIT Actions on event 6:  Deactivate LEARN TIMER.
SPF TIMER expiration while in QUIET Actions on event 7:  Compute SPF.
SPF TIMER expiration while in SHORT WAIT Actions on event 8:  Compute SPF.
SPF TIMER expiration while in LONG WAIT Actions on event 9:  Compute SPF.
All the parameters MUST be configurable at the protocol instance level.
They MAY be configurable on a per IGP LSDB basis (e.g., IS IS level, OSPF area, or IS IS Level 1 area).
All the delays (INITIAL SPF DELAY, SHORT SPF DELAY, LONG SPF DELAY, TIME TO LEARN INTERVAL, and HOLDDOWN INTERVAL)
SHOULD be configurable with a granularity of a millisecond.
They MUST be configurable with a granularity of at least a tenth of a second.
The configurable range for all the parameters SHOULD be from 0 milliseconds to at least 6000 milliseconds.
The HOLDDOWN INTERVAL MUST be defaulted or configured to be longer than the TIME TO LEARN INTERVAL.
In order to satisfy the goals stated in Section 2, operators are RECOMMENDED to configure delay intervals such that INITIAL SPF DELAY <  SHORT SPF DELAY and SHORT SPF DELAY
When setting (default) values, one should consider the customers and their application requirements, the computational power of the routers, the size of the network as determined primarily by the number of IP prefixes advertised in the IGP, the frequency and number of IGP events, and the number of protocol reactions/computations triggered by IGP SPF computation (e.g., BGP, Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP), Traffic Engineering Constrained SPF (CSPF), and Fast Reroute computations).
Note that some or all of these factors may change over the life of the network.
In case of doubt, it's RECOMMENDED that timer intervals should be chosen conservatively (i.e., longer timer values).
For the standard algorithm to be effective in mitigating micro loops, it is RECOMMENDED that all routers in the IGP domain, or at least all the routers in the same area/level, have exactly the same configured values.
In general, the SPF Back Off Delay algorithm is only effective in mitigating micro loops if it is deployed with the same parameters on all routers in the IGP domain or, at least, all routers in an IGP area/level.
The impact of partial deployment is dependent on the particular event, the topology, and the algorithm(s) used on other routers in the IGP area/level.
In cases where the previous SPF Back  Off Delay algorithm was implemented uniformly, partial deployment will increase the frequency and duration of micro loops.
Hence, it is RECOMMENDED that all routers in the IGP domain, or at least within the same area/level, be migrated to the SPF algorithm
described herein at roughly the same time.
Note that this is not a new consideration; over time, network operators have changed SPF delay parameters in order to accommodate new customer requirements for fast convergence, as permitted by new software and hardware.
They may also have progressively replaced an implementation using a given SPF Back Off Delay algorithm with another implementation using a different one.
Impact on Micro loops Micro loops during IGP convergence are due to a non synchronized or
non ordered update of FIBs [RFC5715]
FIBs are installed after multiple steps, such as flooding of the IGP event across the network, SPF wait time, SPF computation, FIB distribution across line cards, and FIB update.
This document only addresses the contribution from the SPF wait time.
This standardized procedure reduces the probability and/or duration of micro loops when IGPs experience multiple temporally close events.
It does not prevent all micro loops; however, it is beneficial and is less complex and costly to implement when compared to full solutions such as Distributed Tunnels [RFC5715], Synchronized FIB Update [RFC5715], or the ordered FIB approach [RFC6976].
This document has no IANA actions.
The algorithm presented in this document does not compromise IGP security.
An attacker having the ability to generate IGP events would be able to delay the IGP convergence time.
The LONG SPF DELAY state may help mitigate the effects of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks generating many IGP events.
