Abstract This document defines a content media feature schema for Internet fax.
It is a profile of the media feature registration mechanisms [1,2,3] for use in performing capability identification between extended Internet fax systems [5].
It replaces and updates the feature schema defined in RFC 2531.
This document defines a content media feature schema for Internet fax.
It is a profile of the media feature registration mechanisms [1,2,3] for use in performing capability identification between extended Internet fax systems [5].
It replaces and updates the feature schema defined in RFC 2531.
The media feature description mechanisms do not describe any specific mechanisms for communicating capability information, but do presume that any such mechanisms will transfer textual values.
In conjunction with this feature schema, they specify a textual format to be used for describing Internet Fax capability information.
The range of capabilities that can be indicated are based on those covered by the TIFF file format for Internet fax [7] and Group 3 facsimile [6].
A companion document [4] describes the relationship and mapping between this schema and Group 3 fax capabilities.
1.1 Organization of this document Section 2 specifies the overall syntax for fax feature descriptions by reference to the media feature registration and syntax documents [1,2].
Section 3 enumerates the feature tags that are to be recognized and processed by extended Internet fax systems, according to their capabilities.
Appendix A contains additional feature tag registrations for media features that are specific to fax and for which no applicable registration already exists.
These are presented in the form prescribed by the media feature registration procedure [1].
1.2 Terminology and document conventions
The term "extended Internet fax system" is used to describe any software, device or combination of these that conforms to the specification "Extended Facsimile Using Internet Mail" [5].
"capability exchange" describes any transfer of information between communicating systems that is used to indicate system capabilities and hence determine the form of data transferred.
This term covers both one way and two way transfers of capability information.
"capability identification" is a particular form of capability exchange in which a receiving system provides capability information to a sending system.
"capability description" is a collection of data presented in some specific format that describes the capabilities of some communicating entity.
It may exist separately from any specific capability exchange mechanism.
Comments like this provide additional nonessential information about the rationale behind this document.
Such information is not needed for building a conformant implementation, but may help those who wish to understand the design in greater depth.
1.3 Discussion of this document Discussion of this document should take place on the Internet fax mailing list hosted by the Internet Mail Consortium (IMC).
Please send comments regarding this document to: ietf fax@imc.org To subscribe to this list, send a message with the body 'subscribe' to "ietf fax request@imc.org".
To see what has gone on before you subscribed, please see the mailing list archive at: http://www.imc.org/ietf fax/ 2.
The syntax for the fax feature schema is described by "A syntax for describing media feature sets" [2].
This in turn calls upon media feature tags that may be registered according to the procedure described in "Media Feature Tag Registration Procedure" [1].
Media feature registration provides a base vocabulary of features that correspond to media handling capabilities.
The feature set syntax provides a mechanism and format for combining these to describe combinations of features.
This memo indicates those features that may be associated with extended Internet fax systems.
Internet fax feature tags This section enumerates and briefly describes a number of feature tags that are defined for use with extended Internet fax systems and applications.
These tags may be used also by other systems and applications that support corresponding capabilities.
The feature tags presented below are those that an extended Internet fax system is expected to recognize its ability or non ability to handle.
Definitive descriptions of feature tags are indicated by reference to their registration according to the media feature registration procedure [1] (some of which are appended to this document).
The presence of a feature tag in this list does not mean that an extended Internet fax system must have that capability;  rather, it must recognize the feature tag and deal with it according to the capabilities that it does have.
Further, an extended Internet fax system is not prevented from recognizing and offering additional feature tags.
The list below is intended to provide a basic vocabulary that all extended Internet fax systems can use in a consistent fashion.
If an unrecognized or unused feature tag is received, the feature set matching rule (described in [2]) operates so that tag is effectively ignored.
These feature values indicate a rendered document size in inches.
Where the actual size is measured in millimetres, a conversion factor of 10/254 may be applied to yield an exact inch based value.
3.2 Resolution Feature tag name    Legal values
Reference: "Media Features for Display, Print, and Fax" [3], and this document appendix A.
If 'dpi xyratio' is present and not equal to 1 then
the horizontal resolution (x axis) is indicated by the 'dpi' feature value, and the vertical resolution (y axis)
is the value of 'dpi' divided by 'dpi  xyratio'.
When describing resolutions for an MRC format document, the complete set of usable resolutions is listed.
However, there are some restrictions on their use:  (a)
100dpi resolution can be used only with multi level images, and (b) any multi level image resolution is required to be an integral sub multiple of the applicable mask resolution.
3.3 Media type Feature tag name
Where the recipient indicates specific support for hard copy or soft copy media type, a sender of color image data may wish to adjust the color components (e.g. per the related rules of ITU recommendation T.42
[9]) to improve rendered image quality on that medium.
legal Reference: "Media Features for Display, Print, and Fax" [3].
Limited (a limited number of colors)
Mapped  (palette or otherwise mapped color)
Reference: "Media Features for Display, Print, and Fax" [3].
The intention here is to give a broad indication of color handling capabilities that might be used, for example, to select among a small number of available data resources.
The value of this feature also gives an indication of the more detailed color handling features that might be applicable (see next section). '
Binary' indicates blank and white, or other bi level capability.
No further qualifying feature tags are required. '
Limited' indicates a small number of distinct fixed colors, such as might be provided by a highlight printer, pen plotter or limited color display.
The 'color levels' tag should be used to indicate the number of distinct colors available.
No ability to indicate any specific or named color is implied by this option.
Some devices might use different intensity levels rather than different hues for distinction.
In the context of Internet fax, 'limited' is interpreted as one bit  per color sample (RGB, CMY or CMYK), depending on the color space used. '
Mapped' indicates that pixel color values are mapped in some specifiable way to a multi component color space.
The 'color levels' tag may be used to indicate the number of distinct colors available; in its absence, sufficient levels to display a photographic image should be assumed. '
Grey' indicates a continuous tone grey scale capability. '
Full' indicates full continuous tone color capability.
For 'Mapped', 'Grey' and 'Full' color, additional feature tags (section 3.6) may be used to further qualify the color reproduction.
The general model for image handling (both color and non color) is described here from a receiver's perspective;  a similar model operates in the reverse direction for a scan/send perspective:
"raw bit stream" is a stream of coded bits (A)  indicates image coding/decoding (MH,MR,MMR,JPEG,JBIG,etc.)
"pixel values" are a single numeric value per picture element that designates the color of that element.
(B)  indicates pixel to color value mapping
"color values" have a separate numeric value for each color component (i.e. L , a , b  in the case of CIELAB indicated above.)
(C)  indicates how the color values are related to a physical color.
This involves interpretation of the color value with respect to a color model
(e.g. RGB, L a b , CMY, CMYK) and a color space (which is typically recipient dependent).
"physical rendition" is a color value physically realized on a display, printer or other device.
There are many variables that can be applied at each stage of the processing of a color image, and any may be critical to meaningful handling of that image in some circumstances.
In other circumstances many of the variables may be implied (to some level of approximation) in the application that uses them (e.g. color images published on a Web page).
The color feature framework described here is intended to allow capability description at a range of granularity:  feature tags which correspond to implied (or "don't care" or "unknown")
feature values may simply be omitted from a capability description.
Grey scale and bi level images are handled within this framework as a special case, having a 1 component color model.
The following features are used for describing color capabilities: 'color levels' indicates the number of distinct values for each picture element, and applies to all but bi level images.
For bi  level images, a value of 2 is implied. '
color space' is used mainly with 'Mapped' and 'Full', but could be used with other modes if the exact color or color model used is significant.
Two kinds of color space can be distinguished: device dependent and calibrated.
Device dependent spaces are named here as 'Device xxx', and are used to indicate a color space that is defined by the receiving device.
Calibrated color spaces presume the existence of a rendering system that is calibrated with respect to an indicated definition, and is capable of processing the device  independent color information accordingly.
A color handling receiver should indicate any appropriate device color space capability in addition to any calibrated color spaces that it may support.
A calibrated color space should be used when precise color matching is required in the absence of specific knowledge of the receiving system.
In practice, although they appear to be separate concepts, the color model and color space cannot be separated.
In the final analysis, a color model (RGB, CMY, etc.) must be defined with respect to some color space. '
color illuminant' indicates a CIE illuminant, using the same general form that is used for this purpose by Group 3 fax (as defined in ITU T.4 [13], section E.6.7).
When the illuminant is specified by its color temperature, the token string 'CTnnnn' is used, where 'nnnn' is a decimal number that is the color temperature in Kelvins; e.g. CT7500 indicates an illuminant color temperature of 7500K. NOTE:
ITU T.4 indicates a binary representation for color temperature values.
In practice, much of the illuminant detail given here will probably be unused by Internet fax.
The only value likely to be specified is 'D50', which is the default color illuminant for Group 3 fax. '
CIELAB L depth', 'CIELAB a depth' and 'CIELAB b depth' indicate the number of different values that are possible for the L , a  and b  color components respectively, and are significant only when colors are represented in a CIELAB color space.
These features would be used with palletized color, or with full color where each color component has a different number of possible values.
Color depth values relate to the representation of colour values rather than the resolution of a scanning or rendering device.
Thus, if 256 different L component values can be represented then the assertion (CIELAB L depth< 256) is used, even if a receiving device can render only 100 distinct luminance values.
(Color rendering resolution is not covered by this memo.)
The 'CIELAB x min' and 'CIELAB x max' values indicate a color gamut (i.e. a range of color values that are used or may be rendered).
A gamut may be indicated in terms of the CIELAB color space even when colors are represented in some other space.
(bi level, per ITU T.85) constraint
(multi level, per ITU T.43)
(may be extended by further registrations)
image interleave    Stripe Plane color subsampling
this document, appendix A. 'image file structure' defines how the coded image data is wrapped and formatted.
The following options are defined here:  'TIFF' indicates image data enclosed and tagged using TIFF structures described in Adobe's definition of TIFF [20].
'TIFF limited' indicates image data structured using TIFF, but with the limitations on the placement of Image File Descriptors (IFDs) indicated in section 4.4.6 of RFC 2301 [7].
'TIFF minimal' indicates a TIFF image format that meets the IFD placement, byte ordering and bit ordering requirements of the "minimal black and white mode" described in section 3.5 of RFC 2301 [7], also known as TIFF S.  'TIFF MRC'
uses a TIFF image structure [20]
augmented with a sub  IFD structure, described for the "Mixed Raster Content mode" in section 8.1.2 of RFC 2301 [7], also known as TIFF M.
This provides a file structure to contain composite images constructed using the MRC model described in T.44 [15] (see tag 'MRC mode').
'TIFF MRC limited' is the same as 'TIFF MRC', except that the primary IFD (i.e. top level IFDs, as opposed to sub IFDs) placement is constrained in the same way as 'TIFF limited'. '
image coding' describes how raw image data is compressed and coded as a sequence of bits.
These are generic tags that may apply to a range of file formats and usage environments. '
image coding constraint' describes how the raw image data coding method is constrained to meet a particular operating environment.
Options defined here are JBIG and JPEG coding constraints that apply in typical Group 3 fax environments.
The 'JBIG stripe size' feature may be used with JBIG image coding, and indicates the number of scan lines in each stripe except the last in an image.
The legal constraints are: (JBIG stripe size 128) (JBIG stripe size> 0)
The latter being equivalent to no restriction.
there are several image coding options here, and not all are required in all circumstances.
Specification of the image file structure tag value alone is not normally sufficient to describe the capabilities of a recipient.
A general rule is that sufficient detail should be provided to exclude any unsupported features.
For extended Internet fax, image file structure and image coding should always be specified, together with additional values described above as needed to clearly indicate which feature tag values are supported and which are not.
(See also the examples in section 4.)
MRC max stripe size <Integer
Reference: this document, appendix A.
The 'MRC mode' feature is used to indicate the availability of MRC (mixed raster content) image format capability.
A zero value indicates MRC is not available, a non zero value indicates the maximum available MRC mode number.
An MRC formatted document is actually a collection of several images, each of which is described by a separate feature collection.
An MRC capable receiver is presumed to be capable of accepting any combination of contained images that conform to both the MRC construction rules and the image coding capabilities declared elsewhere.
Within an MRC formatted document, multi level coders are used for foreground and background images (i.e. odd numbered layers: 1, 3, 5, etc.)
and bi level coders are used for mask layers (i.e. even numbered layers 2, 4, 6, etc.).
MRC format also imposes constraints on the resolutions that can be used.
The 'MRC max stripe size' feature may be used with MRC coding, and indicates the maximum number of scan lines in each MRC stripe.
The legal constraints are: (MRC max stripe size< 256) (MRC max stripe size> 0)
These values indicate upper bounds on the stripe size.
The actual value may vary between stripes, and the actual size for each stripe is indicated in the image data.
The level of detail captured here reflects that used for capability identification in Group 3 facsimile.
4.1 Simple mode Internet fax system
This example describes the capabilities of a typical simple mode Internet fax system.
Note that TIFF profile S is required to be supported by such a system.
(& (image file structure TIFF minimal) (MRC mode 0)
(paper size A4) (ua media stationery) ) 4.2 High end black and white Internet fax system
This would include support for B/W JBIG and be equivalent to what is sometimes called "Super G3", except that Internet fax functionality would be added.
(& (image file structure TIFF)
4.3 Grey scale Internet fax system
This is the previous example extended to handle grey scale multi  level images.
In keeping with Group 3 fax, this example requires equal x  and y  resolutions for a multi level image.
(& (image file structure TIFF)
(image coding constraint JPEG T4E) )
(& (image coding JBIG) (image coding constraint JBIG T43) (JBIG stripe size 128)
4.4 Full color Internet fax system (JPEG only)
This adds 24 bit full color to the previous example.
(& (image file structure TIFF)
(image coding constraint JPEG T4E)
(color levels< 256) (color space CIELAB)
(& (color full) (image coding JPEG) (image coding constraint JPEG T4E)
(color levels< 16777216) (color space CIELAB) (color illuminant D50) (CIELAB L min> 0)
4.5 Full color Internet fax system (JPEG and JBIG)
This adds limited CMY(K), RGB and 16 bit mapped color using JBIG coding to the previous example.
(& (image file structure TIFF)
(image coding constraint JBIG T43) (JBIG stripe size 128)
(image coding constraint JBIG T43) (JBIG stripe size 128)
(color levels< 65536) (color space CIELAB)
(image coding constraint JPEG T4E) )
(& (image coding JBIG) (image coding constraint JBIG T43) (JBIG stripe size 128)
(color levels< 256) (color space CIELAB)
(image coding constraint JPEG T4E)
(& (image coding JBIG) (image coding constraint JBIG T43) (JBIG stripe size 128)
(color levels< 16777216) (color space CIELAB) (color illuminant D50) (CIELAB L min> 0) (CIELAB L max< 100) (CIELAB a min
4.6 Full color Internet fax system (MRC)
This adds MRC image structures to the previous example.
(& (image file structure TIFF MRC)
(MRC mode< 1) (MRC max stripe size> 0)
(image coding JBIG) (image coding constraint JBIG T43) (JBIG stripe size 128)
(image coding constraint JBIG T43) (JBIG stripe size 128)
(image coding constraint JPEG T4E) )
(& (image coding JBIG) (image coding constraint JBIG T43) (JBIG stripe size 128)
(color levels< 256) (color illuminant D50) (CIELAB L min> 0)
(image coding constraint JPEG T4E)
(& (image coding JBIG) (image coding constraint JBIG T43) (JBIG stripe size 128)
(color levels< 16777216) (color space CIELAB) (color illuminant D50) (CIELAB L min> 0) (CIELAB L max< 100) (CIELAB a min
4.7 Sender and receiver feature matching
(& (dpi 200) (dpi xyratio 200/100) (color Binary) (paper size B4)
(color levels< 256) (paper size A4) (image coding JPEG) )
(& (dpi 200) (dpi xyratio 200/100) (color Binary) (paper size B4)
This could be simplified, but there is little gain in doing so at this point.
(color Binary) (paper size B4)
The color document option is eliminated because the receiver cannot handle either color (indicated by '(color Mapped)') or JPEG coding (indicated by '(image coding JPEG)').
The high resolution version of the document with '(dpi 300)' must be send using '(image coding JBIG)' because this is the only available coding of the image data that the receiver can use for high resolution documents.
(The available 300dpi document codings here are MMR and JBIG, and the receiver capabilities are MH, MR and JBIG.)
The low resolution version of the document can be sent with either MH or MR coding as the receiver can deal with either of these for low resolution documents.
The high resolution variant of the document is available only for A4, so that is the paper size used in that case.
Similarly the low resolution version is sent for B4 paper.
Even though the sender may not understand the 'ua media' feature tag, and does not mention it, the matching rules preserve the constraint that the B4 document is rendered with '(ua media continuous)', and the A4 document may be rendered with '(ua media [stationery,transparency])'.
Finally, note that when matching an MRC document description, the description of each component sub image must match the capabilities of the intended receiver.
IANA Considerations Appendix A of this document repeats the descriptions of feature tags introduced by RFC 2531 [22], with some small revisions.
These have been registered in the "IETF tree", according to the procedure described in section 3.1.1 of "Media Feature Tag Registration Procedure" [1]
(i.e. these feature tags are subject to the "IETF Consensus" policies described in RFC 2434 [21]).
Appendix section A.5 introduces one new feature tag (color  illuminant) to be registered according to the same procedure.
An ASN.1 identifier should be assigned for this new tag and replaced in the body of the registration.
The points raised below are in addition to the general security considerations for extended Internet fax [5], and others discussed in [2,8,11,12,13] 6.1 Capability descriptions and mechanisms Negotiation mechanisms reveal information about one party to other parties.
This may raise privacy concerns, and may allow a malicious party to make better guesses about the presence of specific security holes.
Most of these concerns pertain to capability information getting into the hands of someone who may abuse it.
This document specifies capabilities that help a sender to determine what image characteristics can be processed by the recipient, not mechanisms for their publication.
Implementers and users should take care that the mechanisms employed ensure that capabilities are revealed only to appropriate persons, systems and agents.
Unsolicited bulk mail:  if it is known that a recipient can process certain types of images, they may be targeted by bulk mailers that want to send such images.
Feature registrations A.1 Image size  Media Feature tag
they indicate horizontal (size x) and vertical (size y) dimensions.
The unit of measure is inches (to be consistent with the measure of resolution defined by the feature tag 'dpi').
Where the actual size is available in millimetres, a conversion factor of 10/254 may be applied to yield an exact inch based value.
Values appropriate for use with these feature tags: Rational (>0)
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms:
Print and display applications where different media choices will be made depending on the size of the recipient device.
Examples of typical use: This example describes the maximum scanned image width and height for Group 3 fax:
mm (8.46x11.69 inches): (size x< 2150/254)
The memo "Media Features for Display, Print, and Fax" [3] describes features (pix x, pix y) for measuring document size in pixels.
Fax applications should declare physical dimensions using the features defined here.
Considerations particular to use in individual applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Where no physical size is known or available, but a pixel size is known, a notional size should be declared based upon known pixel dimensions and a notional resolution of (say) 100dpi
The notional 100dpi resolution is used as it represents a fairly typical resolution for a pixel limited display.
: For interoperability with other (non fax) applications that use only pixel based measurements, pixel dimensions (pix x, pix y) may be declared in addition to physical measurements.
IETF A.2 Resolution aspect ratio  Media Feature tag name(s):
ASN.1 identifier associated with this feature tag: 1.3.6.1.8.1.9  Summary of the media features indicated: This feature is used to indicate differential horizontal and vertical resolution capability.
In the absence of this feature, horizontal and vertical resolutions are presumed to be the same.
When this feature tag is specified, any declared resolution (dpi) is presumed to apply to the horizontal axis, and the vertical resolution is obtained by dividing that declared resolution by the resolution ratio.
The value of this feature is a pure number, since it represents the ratio of two resolution values.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag: Rational (>0)
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Internet fax, and other print or display applications that must handle differential horizontal and vertical resolution values.
The memo "Media Features for Display, Print, and Fax" [3] describes a feature (dpi) for measuring document resolution.
: When interoperating with an application that does not recognize the differential resolution feature, resolution matching may be performed on the basis of the horizontal resolution only, so aspect ratio information may be lost.
Media Feature tag name(s): color levels  ASN.1 identifier associated with this feature tag: 1.3.6.1.8.1.10  Summary of the media features indicated: This feature tag is used to indicate a number of different image data pixel color values.
When mapped (palletized) color is used, this is generally different from the number of different colors that can be represented through the color mapping function.
This feature tag is used in conjunction with a 'color' feature having a value other than 'Binary'.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag:
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Color image printing or display applications where the data resource used may depend upon color handling capabilities of the recipient.
Interoperability considerations: The actual number of color values used by a document does not, in general, exactly match the number that can be handled by a recipient.
To achieve a feature match, at least one must be declared as an inequality (i.e. not both as equalities).
Privacy concerns, related to exposure of personal information: Where feature matching is used to select content applicable to the physical abilities of a user, unusual values for this feature tag might give an indication of a user's restricted abilities.
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
Author/Change controller: IETF A.4 Color space  Media Feature tag
name(s): color space  ASN.1 identifier associated with this feature tag: 1.3.6.1.8.1.11  Summary of the media features indicated: This feature indicates a color space.
A color space value provides two types of information:
the color model used to represent a color value, including the number of color components  a mapping between color values and their physical realizations Device color space values are defined for applications where the general color representation used is significant, but exact color rendering is left to the device used.
Device color spaces defined here have values of the form 'Device  xxx'.
Calibrated color space values are provided for use with a rendering system that is calibrated with respect to some indicated definition, and capable of processing device  independent color information accordingly.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag:
(device dependent CMY) Device CMYK
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms:
Color image printing and display applications where the data resource used may depend upon color handling capabilities of the recipient.
Scanning applications where the data transferred may depend upon the image generation capabilities of the originator.
Examples of typical use: To describe rendering or scanning capabilities: (color space [Device RGB,CIELAB])
To describe capabilities assumed by a document for which approximate color reproduction is required: (color space Device RGB)
To describe capabilities assumed by a document for which exact color reproduction is required: (color space CIELAB)  Related standards or documents:
CIELAB color space is defined in [19] CIELAB use for fax is described in ITU T.42 [9]
: A color handling receiver should indicate any appropriate device color space capability, in addition to any calibrated color spaces that it may support.
Calibrated color spaces are intended to be used when precise color matching is required;  otherwise, if applicable, a device color space (color space Device xxx) should be indicated.
Documents for which exact color matching is not important should indicate a device color space capability, if applicable.
These principles allow sender/receiver feature matching to be achieved when exact color matching is not required.
Privacy concerns, related to exposure of personal information: Where feature matching is used to select content applicable to the physical abilities of a user, unusual values for this feature tag might give an indication of a user's restricted abilities.
Denial of service concerns related to consequences of specifying incorrect values: Failure to indicate a generic color space capability for a device may lead to failure to match color space for an application or document that does not require an exact color match.
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
Author/Change controller: IETF A.5 CIELAB color illuminant
Media Feature tag name(s): color illuminant
ASN.1 identifier associated with this feature tag: 1.3.6.1.8.1.29
Summary of the media features indicated: This feature indicates a color illuminant.
This has the effect of modifying the color space calibration to reflect the use of different sources of illumination.
A color illuminant value would normally be used only with a calibrated color space.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag:
F11 Defined by color  CTnnnn where 'nnnn' is a decimal temperature:
representation of the illuminant color temperature in Kelvins.
(may be extended by further registrations)
The default color illuminant for Group 3 fax is D50.
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms:
Color image printing and display applications where the data resource used may depend upon detailed color handling capabilities of the recipient.
Scanning applications where the data transferred may depend upon the image generation capabilities of the originator.
Related standards or documents: CIELAB color illuminant representations are described in ITU T.4 [13], Annex E.6.7.
A color handling receiver that supports a calibrated color space should indicate any constraint on the illuminants it can handle.
In the absence of a color illuminant constraint, a receiver is presumed to accept and deal with any specified illuminant value.
[this document]  Related media types or data formats:
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
IETF A.6 CIELAB color depth
Media Feature tag name(s): CIELAB L depth CIELAB
a depth CIELAB b depth
ASN.1 identifiers associated with these feature tags: CIELAB L depth:   1.3.6.1.8.1.12 CIELAB a depth:
1.3.6.1.8.1.13 CIELAB b depth:   1.3.6.1.8.1.14
Summary of the media features indicated: These feature tags indicate a color depth capability;  i.e. the level of detail to which an individual CIELAB color component can be specified.
They define the number of distinct values possible for each of the color components L ,
Typically, this feature would be used with 'color mapped', and possibly 'color grey' or 'color full', to indicate the number of distinct colors that can be represented.
this feature tag describes the number of values that can be represented for a color component, and does not necessarily indicate the number of distinct values that can be rendered or resolved by a system.
Values appropriate for use with these feature tags: Integer (>0)
These feature tags are intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms:
Color image printing and display applications where the data resource used may depend upon color handling capabilities of the recipient.
Scanning applications where the data transferred may depend upon the image generation capabilities of the originator.
(CIELAB b depth< 128) )
(& (color full) (color levels< 16777216) (CIELAB L depth< 256)
(CIELAB b depth< 128) )
(CIELAB a depth 32) (CIELAB b depth 32) )
(& (color full) (color levels 32768) (CIELAB L depth 128)
(CIELAB a depth 32) (CIELAB b depth 32) )
The memo "Media Features for Display, Print, and Fax" [3] defines a feature (color) for indicating basic color capabilities.
CIELAB color space is defined in [19] CIELAB use for fax is described in ITU T.42 [9]
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
IETF A.7 CIELAB color gamut  Media Feature tag
name(s): CIELAB L min CIELAB L max CIELAB a min CIELAB
a max CIELAB b min CIELAB b max
CIELAB L min' and 'CIELAB L max' are the minimum and maximum values of the L  component. '
CIELAB a min' and 'CIELAB
a max' are the minimum and maximum values of the a  component. '
CIELAB b min' and 'CIELAB b max' are the minimum and maximum values of the b  component.
color component values are assumed to be rational numbers, so a limited gamut does not necessarily indicate limited color resolution.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag:
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms:
Color image printing and display applications where the data resource used may depend upon detailed color handling capabilities of the recipient.
Scanning applications where the data transferred may depend upon the detailed color image generation capabilities of the originator.
(CIELAB b max<  85) )
(CIELAB b max  65) )
Related standards or documents: CIELAB color space is defined in [19] CIELAB use for fax is described in ITU T.42 [9]
Interoperability considerations: When describing a recipient's capabilities, the minimum and maximum color component values that can be rendered should be indicated by inequalities as shown in the examples above.
When describing a document, the actual minimum and maximum color component values used should be indicated, as shown above.
Privacy concerns, related to exposure of personal information: Where feature matching is used to select content applicable to the physical abilities of a user, unusual values for this feature tag might give an indication of a user's restricted abilities.
[this document]  Related media types or data formats:
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
Author/Change controller: IETF A.8 Image file structure  Media Feature tag
ASN.1 identifier associated with this feature tag: 1.3.6.1.8.1.21  Summary of the media features indicated: This feature indicates a file structure used for transfer and presentation of image data.
It does not indicate image data coding:  that is described by separate feature tags (image coding, etc.).
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag:
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Internet fax, and other print or display applications that transfer image data.
: See Appendix B of this memo.
Considerations particular to use in individual applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: This tag is intended to provide information about an image file structure.
Information about image data coding is provided by other tags.
The following tag values are defined here:  'TIFF' indicates image data enclosed and tagged using TIFF structures described in Adobe's definition of TIFF [20].
'TIFF limited' indicates image data structured using TIFF, but with limitations on the placement of Image File Descriptors (IFDs) within the file, which are indicated in section 4.4.6 of RFC 2301 [7].
'TIFF minimal' indicates a TIFF image format that meets the IFD placement, byte ordering and bit ordering requirements of the "minimal black and white mode" described in section 3.5 of RFC 2301 [7], also known as TIFF S.  'TIFF MRC'
uses a TIFF image structure [20]
augmented with a sub IFD structure, described for the "Mixed Raster Content mode" in section 8.1.2 of RFC 2301 [7], also known as TIFF M (see also tag 'MRC mode').
'TIFF MRC limited' is the same as 'TIFF MRC', except that the IFD placement is constrained as for 'TIFF limited'.
Registration of additional image file structure tags should focus similarly on image file structure issues, not raw image data compression and coding.
As a guide, an image file structure may contain image data coded in a variety of ways, and carries information to describe that coding separately from MIME content type labelling, etc.
Related feature tags: image coding
[this document]  Related media types or data formats:
[20]  Intended usage: Internet fax Image scanning/
Author/Change controller: IETF A.9 Image data coding  Media Feature tag
name(s): image coding  ASN.1 identifier associated with this feature tag: 1.3.6.1.8.1.22  Summary of the media features indicated: This feature tag indicates a form of image data compression and coding used.
It identifies a generic image coding technique used, without regard to any specific profiling of that technique that may be applied.
Values for this feature are generally applicable across a wide range of image transfer applications.
This information is distinct from the image file structure and MRC information conveyed by the 'image file structure' tags.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag:
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Internet fax, and other applications that transfer image data.
: See Appendix B of this memo.
Related standards or documents: MH, MR:
Interoperability considerations: To establish the correct conditions for interoperability between systems, capabilities to handle the generic image coding technique and the specific image coding constraints must be established.
Related feature tags: image coding constraint
[this document] JBIG stripe size
[this document]  Related media types or data formats:
Intended usage: Internet fax Image scanning/
ASN.1 identifier associated with these feature tags: 1.3.6.1.8.1.23  Summary of the media features indicated: This feature tag qualifies the 'image coding' feature with a specific profile or usage constraints.
Values for this feature are generally specific to some given value of 'image coding' and also to some restricted application or class of applications.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag:
(bi level, per ITU T.85)
(multi level, per ITU T.43)
(may be extended by further registrations)
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Internet fax, and other applications that transfer image data.
The specific values for this feature indicated above are intended for use with Internet fax.
: See Appendix B of this memo.
ITU T.4 Annex E [13]
Interoperability considerations: To establish the correct conditions for interoperability between systems, capabilities to handle the generic image coding technique and the specific image coding constraints must be established.
Related feature tags: image coding
[this document] JBIG stripe size
[this document]  Related media types or data formats:
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
Author/Change controller: IETF A.11 JBIG stripe size  Media Feature tag
name(s): JBIG stripe size  ASN.1 identifier associated with these feature tags: 1.3.6.1.8.1.24  Summary of the media features indicated: This feature is a specific usage constraint that is applied to JBIG image coding (image coding JBIG), and indicates the allowable size for each stripe of an image, except the last.
A stripe of a JBIG image is a delimited horizontal band of compressed image data that can be decompressed separately from the surrounding data.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag:
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Internet fax, and other applications that transfer image data.
Examples of typical use: (JBIG stripe size 128) (JBIG stripe size>0)
Considerations particular to use in individual applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: In the case of Internet fax, the specific constraints allowed for a receiver are those given as examples above.
Specifying a stripe size that is not limited (JBIG stripe  size>0) means that an entire page of image data is encoded as a single unit.
This may place considerable demands on the memory of a receiving system, as the entire stripe needs to be buffered in memory.
Interoperability considerations: To establish the correct conditions for interoperability between systems, capabilities to handle the generic image coding technique and the specific image coding constraints must be established.
[this document]  Related media types or data formats:
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
Image interleave  Media Feature tag
name(s): image interleave  ASN.1 identifier associated with this feature tag: 1.3.6.1.8.1.25  Summary of the media features indicated: This feature indicates an image interleave capability.
It may be used with JBIG images (image coding JBIG) to indicate color plane interleaving of either stripes or entire image planes.
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Internet fax, and other applications that transfer image data.
Examples of typical use: (image interleave stripe)
Considerations particular to use in individual applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Specifying a plane interleave means that an entire page of image data must be buffered in order to generate or render the image.
This may place considerable demands on the memory of a sending or receiving system.
Related feature tags: image coding
[this document] JBIG stripe size
[this document]  Related media types or data formats:
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
IETF A.13 Color subsampling  Media Feature tag name(s):
color subsampling  ASN.1 identifier associated with this feature tag:
1.3.6.1.8.1.26  Summary of the media features indicated: This feature tag indicates whether color information may be subsampled with respect to luminance data.
It is used with continuous color images (color full), color spaces that use separate luminance and color components (e.g. color space LAB), and image file structures that support color subsampling.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag:
This value indicates a full set of color component samples for each luminance component sample.
" This value indicates one set of color component samples for each 4 luminance samples.
(may be extended by further registrations)
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms:
Color image printing and display applications where the data resource used may depend upon color handling capabilities of the recipient.
Scanning applications where the data transferred may depend upon the image generation capabilities of the originator.
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
Author/Change controller: IETF A.14 MRC availability and mode  Media Feature tag name(s):
MRC mode  ASN.1 identifier associated with this feature tag:
1.3.6.1.8.1.27  Summary of the media features indicated: This feature is used to indicate the availability of MRC (mixed raster content) image format capability, and also the MRC mode available.
A zero value indicates MRC is not available, a non zero value (in the range 1..7) indicates the available MRC mode number.
An MRC formatted document is actually a collection of several images, each of which is described by a separate feature collection.
An MRC capable receiver is presumed to be capable of accepting any combination of contained images that conform to the MRC construction rules, where each such image matches the separately declared resolution, color capability, color model, image coding, and any other capabilities.
an MRC formatted document may appear within a TIFF image file structure.
Within an MRC formatted document, multi level coders are used for foreground and background images (i.e. odd numbered layers: 1, 3, 5, etc.)
and bi level coders are used for mask layers (i.e. even numbered layers 2, 4, 6, etc.).
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag: Integer (0..7)
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Internet fax, and other applications that transfer image data.
: See Appendix B of this document.
Interoperability considerations: To establish the correct conditions for interoperability between systems, capabilities to handle the MRC mode and any contained image coding techniques must be established.
Related feature tags: image coding
[this document]  Related media types or data formats:
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
Author/Change controller: IETF A.15 MRC maximum stripe size
Media Feature tag name(s): MRC max stripe size  ASN.1 identifier associated with this feature tag: 1.3.6.1.8.1.28
Summary of the media features indicated: This feature may be used with MRC coding (MRC mode> 1), and indicates the maximum number of scan lines in each MRC stripe.
The value given indicates an upper bound on the stripe size.
The actual value may vary between stripes, and the actual size for each stripe is indicated in the image data.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag: Integer (>0)
The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: Internet fax, and other applications that transfer image data.
Examples of typical use: (MRC max stripe size< 256) (MRC max stripe size> 0)  Considerations particular to use in individual applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms:
For Internet fax, the legal constraints for an image receiver are those given as examples above.
Related feature tags: MRC mode
[this document]  Related media types or data formats:
Internet fax Color image scanning/rendering applications
Author/Change controller: IETF Appendix B:
This appendix contains descriptions of the TIFF modes defined by RFC 2301 [7], presented as feature set expressions in the form defined by "A syntax for describing media feature sets" [2] and using the feature schema introduced by this document.
These may be taken as illustrations of the feature set combinations that are required for the corresponding TIFF profiles described by RFC 2301.
TIFF S has no optional elements, so is presented as a single feature set.
Other profiles are presented as (TIFF x base) and
(TIFF x full) indicating the minimum and full feature sets associated with each profile.
(color Binary) (MRC mode 0)
(image coding JBIG) (image coding constraint JBIG T85)
(color levels< 256) (MRC mode 0) (image coding JPEG)
(image coding constraint JPEG T4E)
(dpi xyratio 1) (size x 864/100)
(image coding constraint JPEG T4E)
(CIELAB L depth< 4096) )
(& (color full) (color levels< 68719476736)
(color levels< 256) (color space CIELAB)
(dpi xyratio 1) (size x 864/100)
(image coding constraint JBIG T43)
(color levels< 16) (color space Device CMYK) )
(color levels< 65536) (color space CIELAB)
(CIELAB b depth< 4096) )
(CIELAB L depth< 4096) )
(& (color full) (color space CIELAB) (color levels< 68719476736)
(MRC max stripe size< 256) )
(TIFF J) ) indicates support for all black and white modes.
Each sub image in an MRC image must conform to the capabilities indicated AND also to any additional constraints imposed by the MRC structure, such as bi level mask layer, etc.
See sections A.13 and section 3.7.
Changes from RFC 2531 00a
23 Jun 1999  Updated Appendix B with more complete TIFF FX profile descriptions.
Added note to section 3.5 clarifying the meaning of (color limited) in the context of Internet fax.
Added note to section 3.6 and A.6 to clarify interpretation of color depth.
In A.6, noted that color gamut is not the same as color resolution;  fixed example.
Split section 3.7 into two sections, dealing with simple image coding options and MRC composite image options.
Added new feature tag 'color illuminant' (sections 3.6, A.5).
Added cross references from TIFF M image file structure to MRC mode tag.
10 Aug 1999  Bring examples into line with T.30 mapping document [4], and reorganize to make the expression structure less complex.
Add details of mailing list for discussion.
Added JPEG only colour example.
Change definition of image file  structure tag to indicate more precisely what is being defined, and to draw out the distinction between a file structure to contain MRC images (image file structure), and the MRC image model (MRC mode). 01a
01 Oct 1999  Update author's address and some references. 01b
Jan 2000  Incorporate last call review comments (all editorial).
