The initializing call is MATRIXSET(N, M, DEFINITION, CODE)
DEFINITION is packed with bits
<   1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 \
We leave it up to the MATRIXSET routine to be able to undo this.
Obviously, for user convenience we have some standard sets they can use to save having to define their own, and if they want to define their own, we make routines to ease the pain.
The array CODE, on the other hand, is a byte stream, i.e., a stream of eight bit groups of bits which will correspond to each of the groups of (N x M) bits.
This allows 256 pseudocharacters for one set.
To enter an item of data in this mode the procedure is
MATRIXAREA(ARRAY, LENGTH) ARRAY is a buffer location and length is the number of code bytes which are to be put out.
Each call will put out one row of the display.
Unused bytes at the end of the stream (bytes left over in the last word) should be zero.
Any codes in excess of the maximum number allowed on a line will be discarded.
It should be noted that this routine is nominally used for special character sets, or for that matter, any character sets that are software generated on dot raster devices.
In addition, however, it can be used for photomosaic displays, area filling on maps, and development of capability of producing audiovisual aids for presentations.
The subsequent data items specify only the location and character of a change in the scanning beam (or program).
SCANLINESET(DELTA, LEVELS, ORGMODE) DELTA is an integer specifying the number of display points to be included in each step.
LEVELS denotes the number of intensity levels to be used, and the sign of ORGMODE specifies whether the scan is to be from the bottom up (plus) or top down (minus) on the display.
For both cases we will assume left to right.
The absolute value of ORGMODE gives the starting Y position.
All subsequent calls to this routine are of the form SCANLINE(X, INTENSITY)
The first such call denotes the origin in X and the initial intensity.
Subsequent calls denote the X value of the next point on the scan where the intensity is to change, and that new intensity.
The program (or device) takes care of the stepping of the scan by DELTA across the page, with the current intensity.
Thus, the program (device) only needs a data item for each change in the scan, not for each position.
When the next X is less than the previous X, or the X position has been stepped to its limit, the Y position in the incremented or decremented to continue the scan on the next line.
We see the device which accepts such a display as accepting a stream of triplets of bytes, where the first two bytes (16 bits) specify the X and the third (8 bits) specifies the level.
The end of the stream would be specified by three bytes of deletes (all ones).
This display mode is implemented in hardware on the display at the Coordinated Science Laboratory at this University.
It is the same one which was used for the grey scale work which has been reported by Bouknight.
The initializing call for this procedure is SCANPOINTSET(DELTA, LEVELS, ORGMODE)
The arguments are the same as for SCANLINE.
The difference is in the meaning of subsequent calls.
The origin for the scan is at the left end of the line corresponding to the absolute value of ORGMODE.
The stepping is done from left to right and at the end of each line, the Y position is incremented or decremented by DELTA, according to the sign of ORGMODE.
Subsequent calls to this procedure are of the form SCANPOINT(LEVEL) where LEVEL denotes the intensity level at which the next point is to be displayed.
In this mode every point must have its intensity specified by a separate call to the routine (byte to the device).
However, beyond the starting point no position information is required.
