Abstract This document specifies an initial set of identifiers to be used in the Transport Profile of Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS TP).
The MPLS TP requirements (RFC 5654) require that the elements and objects in an MPLS TP environment are able to be configured and managed without a control plane.
In such an environment, many conventions for defining identifiers are possible.
This document defines identifiers for MPLS TP management and Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) functions compatible with IP/ MPLS conventions.
This document is a product of a joint Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) / International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU T) effort to include an MPLS Transport Profile within the IETF MPLS and Pseudowire Emulation Edge
to Edge (PWE3) architectures to support the capabilities and functionalities of a packet transport network as defined by the ITU T. 1.
This document specifies an initial set of identifiers to be used in the Transport Profile of Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS TP).
The MPLS TP requirements (RFC 5654 [7]) require that the elements and objects in an MPLS TP environment are able to be configured and managed without a control plane.
In such an environment, many conventions for defining identifiers are possible.
This document defines identifiers for MPLS TP management and OAM functions compatible with IP/MPLS conventions.
That is, the identifiers have been chosen to be compatible with existing IP, MPLS, GMPLS, and Pseudowire definitions.
This document is a product of a joint Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) / International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU T) effort to include an MPLS Transport Profile within the IETF MPLS and Pseudowire Emulation Edge
to Edge (PWE3) architectures to support the capabilities and functionalities of a packet transport network as defined by the ITU T. 1.1.
Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching IGP:
Label Switched Path LSR: Label Switching Router MEG: Maintenance Entity Group MEP: Maintenance Entity Group End Point MIP:
Maintenance Entity Group Intermediate Point MPLS:
Multiprotocol Label Switching NNI: Network to Network Interface OAM: Operations, Administration, and Maintenance PW:
Resource Reservation Protocol RSVP TE
: RSVP Traffic Engineering SAII:
Sub Path Maintenance Entity T PE:
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].
Many of the identifiers are composed of a set of other identifiers.
These are expressed by listing the latter identifiers joined with double colon "::
For example, A1 Node ID is the Node ID of a node referred to as A1.
The notation defines a preferred ordering of the fields.
Specifically, the designation A1 is used to indicate the lower sort order of a field or set of fields and Z9 is used to indicate the higher sort order of the same.
The sort is either alphanumeric or numeric depending on the field's definition.
Note, however, that the uniqueness of an identifier does not depend on the ordering, but rather, upon the uniqueness and scoping of the fields that compose the identifier.
Further, the preferred ordering is not intended to constrain protocol designs by dictating a particular field sequence (for example, see Section 5.2.1) or even what fields appear in which objects (for example, see Section 5.3).
In order to configure, operate, and manage a transport network based on the MPLS Transport Profile, a number of entities require identification.
MEP    MIP Note that we have borrowed the term "tunnel" from RSVP TE (RFC 3209 [2]) where it is used to describe an entity that provides a logical association between a source and destination LSR.
The tunnel, in turn, is instantiated by one or more LSPs, where the additional LSPs are used for protection or re grooming of the tunnel.
Uniquely Identifying an Operator the Global ID
The Global ID is defined to uniquely identify an operator.
RFC 5003 [3] defines a globally unique Attachment Interface Identifier (AII).
That AII is composed of three parts: a Global ID that uniquely identifies an operator, a prefix, and, finally, an attachment circuit identifier.
We have chosen to use that Global ID for MPLS TP.
Quoting from RFC 5003, Section 3.2:
The global ID can contain the 2 octet or 4 octet value of the provider's Autonomous System Number (ASN).
It is expected that the global ID will be derived from the globally unique ASN of the autonomous system hosting the PEs containing the actual AIIs.
The presence of a global ID based on the operator's ASN ensures that the AII will be globally unique.
A Global ID is an unsigned 32 bit value and MUST be derived from a 4 octet AS number assigned to the operator.
Note that 2 octet AS numbers have been incorporated in the 4 octet by placing the 2 octet AS number in the low order octets and setting the two high order octets to zero.
ASN 0 is reserved and cannot be assigned to an operator.
An identifier containing a Global ID of zero means that no Global ID is specified.
Note that a Global ID of zero is limited to entities contained within a single operator and MUST NOT be used across an NNI.
The Global ID is used solely to provide a globally unique context for other MPLS TP identifiers.
While the AS number used in the Global ID MUST be one that the operator is entitled to use, the use of the Global ID is not related to the use of the ASN in protocols such as BGP.
An LSR requires identification of the node itself and of its interfaces.
An interface is the attachment point to a server (sub )layer, e.g., MPLS TP section or MPLS TP tunnel.
We call the identifier associated with a node
a "Node Identifier" (Node ID).
The Node ID is a unique 32 bit value assigned by the operator within the scope of a Global ID.
The structure of the Node ID is operator specific and is outside the scope of this document.
However, the value zero is reserved and MUST NOT be used.
Where IPv4 addresses are used, it may be convenient to use the Node's IPv4 loopback address as the Node ID; however, the Node ID does not need to have any association with the IPv4 address space used in the operator's IGP or EGP.
Where IPv6 addresses are used exclusively, a 32 bit value unique within the scope of a Global ID is assigned.
An LSR can support multiple layers (e.g., hierarchical LSPs) and the Node ID belongs to the multiple layer context, i.e., it is applicable to all LSPs or PWs that originate on, have an intermediate point on, or terminate on the node.
In situations where a Node ID needs to be globally unique, this is accomplished by prefixing the identifier with the operator's Global ID.
The term "interface" is used for the attachment point to an MPLS TP section.
Within the context of a particular node, we call the identifier associated with an interface an "Interface Number" (IF Num).
The IF Num is a 32 bit unsigned integer assigned by the operator and MUST be unique within the scope of a Node ID.
The IF Num value 0 has special meaning (see Section 7.3, MIP Identifiers) and MUST NOT be used to identify an MPLS TP interface.
Note that IF Num has no relation with the ifNum object defined in RFC 2863 [8].
Further, no mapping is mandated between IF Num and ifIndex in RFC 2863.
An "Interface Identifier" (IF ID) identifies an interface uniquely within the context of a Global ID.
It is formed by concatenating the Node ID with the IF Num.
That is, an IF ID is a 64 bit identifier formed as Node ID::IF Num.
This convention was chosen to allow compatibility with GMPLS.
The GMPLS signaling functional description [4] requires interface identification.
GMPLS allows three formats for the Interface ID.
The third format consists of an IPv4 address plus a 32 bit unsigned integer for the specific interface.
The format defined for MPLS TP is consistent with this format, but uses the Node ID instead of an IPv4 address.
If an IF ID needs to be globally unique, this is accomplished by prefixing the identifier with the operator's Global ID.
Note that MPLS TP supports hierarchical sections.
The attachment point to an MPLS TP section at any (sub )layer requires a node unique IF Num.
MPLS TP Tunnel and LSP Identifiers
In MPLS, the actual transport of packets is provided by Label Switched Paths (LSPs).
A transport service may be composed of multiple LSPs.
Further, the LSPs providing a service may change over time due to protection and restoration events.
In order to clearly identify the service, we use the term "MPLS TP Tunnel" or simply "tunnel" for a service provided by (for example) a working LSP and protected by a protection LSP.
The "Tunnel Identifier" (Tunnel ID) identifies the transport service and provides a stable binding to the client in the face of changes in the data plane LSPs used to provide the service due to protection or restoration events.
This section defines an MPLS TP Tunnel ID to uniquely identify a tunnel, and an MPLS TP LSP Identifier (LSP ID) to uniquely identify an LSP associated with a tunnel.
For the case where multiple LSPs (for example) are used to support a single service with a common set of end points, using the Tunnel ID allows for a trivial mapping between the server and client layers, providing a common service identifier that may be either defined by or used by the client.
Note that this usage is not intended to constrain protection schemes, and may be used to identify any service (protected or unprotected) that may appear to the client as a single service attachment point.
Keeping the Tunnel ID consistent across working and protection LSPs is a useful construct currently employed within GMPLS.
However, the Tunnel ID for a protection LSP MAY differ from that used by its corresponding working LSP.
MPLS TP Point to Point Tunnel Identifiers
At each end point, a tunnel is uniquely identified by the end point's Node ID and a locally assigned tunnel number.
Specifically, a "Tunnel Number" (Tunnel Num) is a 16 bit unsigned integer unique within the context of the Node ID.
The motivation for each end point having its own tunnel number is to allow a compact form for the MEP ID.
Having two tunnel numbers also serves to simplify other signaling (e.g., setup of associated bidirectional tunnels as described in Section 5.3).
The concatenation of the two end point identifiers serves as the full identifier.
Using the A1/Z9 convention, the format of a Tunnel ID is: A1 {Node ID::Tunnel Num}::Z9
{Node ID::Tunnel Num} Where the Tunnel ID needs to be globally unique, this is accomplished by using globally unique Node IDs as defined above.
Thus, a globally unique Tunnel ID becomes: A1 {Global ID::Node
When an MPLS TP Tunnel is configured, it MUST be assigned a unique IF ID at each end point.
As usual, the IF ID is composed of the local Node ID concatenated with a 32 bit IF Num.
This section defines identifiers for MPLS TP
co routed bidirectional and associated bidirectional LSPs.
Note that MPLS TP Sub Path Maintenance Entities (SPMEs), as defined in RFC 5921 [9], are also LSPs and use these same forms of identifiers.
co routed bidirectional LSP can be uniquely identified by a single LSP number within the scope of an MPLS TP Tunnel ID.
Specifically, an LSP Number (LSP Num) is a 16 bit unsigned integer unique within the Tunnel ID.
Thus, the format of an MPLS TP co routed bidirectional LSP ID is: A1 {Node ID::Tunnel
Num Note that the uniqueness of identifiers does not depend on the A1/Z9 sort ordering.
Thus, the identifier: Z9 {Node ID::Tunnel Num}::A1
{Node ID::Tunnel Num}::LSP Num is synonymous with the one above.
At the data plane level, a co routed bidirectional LSP is composed of two unidirectional LSPs traversing the same links in opposite directions.
Since a co routed bidirectional LSP is provisioned or signaled as a single entity, a single LSP Num is used for both unidirectional LSPs.
The unidirectional LSPs can be referenced by the identifiers:
A1 Node ID::A1 Tunnel Num::LSP Num::Z9 Node ID and Z9 Node ID::Z9
Tunnel Num::LSP Num::A1 Node ID, respectively.
Where the LSP ID needs to be globally unique, this is accomplished by using globally unique Node IDs as defined above.
Thus, a globally unique LSP ID becomes: A1 {Global ID::Node ID::Tunnel Num}::Z9
MPLS TP Associated Bidirectional LSP Identifiers
For an associated bidirectional LSP, each of the unidirectional LSPs from A1 to Z9 and Z9 to A1 require LSP Nums.
Each unidirectional LSP is uniquely identified by a single LSP number within the scope of the ingress's Tunnel Num.
Specifically, an "LSP Number" (LSP Num) is a 16 bit unsigned integer unique within the scope of the ingress's Tunnel Num.
Thus, the format of an MPLS TP associated bidirectional LSP ID
is: A1 {Node ID::Tunnel Num::LSP Num}::
Z9 {Node ID::Tunnel Num::LSP Num} At the data plane level, an associated bidirectional LSP is composed of two unidirectional LSPs between two nodes in opposite directions.
The unidirectional LSPs may be referenced by the identifiers:
A1 Node ID::A1 Tunnel Num::A1 LSP Num::Z9 Node ID and
Tunnel Num::Z9 LSP Num::A1 Node ID, respectively.
Where the LSP ID needs to be globally unique, this is accomplished by using globally unique Node IDs as defined above.
Thus, a globally unique LSP ID becomes: A1 {Global ID::Node ID::Tunnel Num::LSP Num}:: Z9 {Global ID::Node
Mapping to RSVP Signaling This section is informative and exists to help understand the structure of the LSP IDs.
GMPLS [5] is based on RSVP TE [2].
This section defines the mapping from an MPLS TP LSP ID to RSVP TE.
At this time, RSVP TE has yet to be extended to accommodate Global IDs.
Thus, a mapping is only made for the network unique form of the LSP ID and assumes that the operator has chosen to derive its Node IDs from valid IPv4 addresses.
GMPLS and RSVP TE signaling use a 5 tuple to uniquely identify an LSP within an operator's network.
This tuple is composed of a Tunnel End point Address, Tunnel ID, Extended Tunnel ID, Tunnel Sender Address, and (RSVP)
RFC 3209 allows some flexibility in how the Extended Tunnel ID is chosen, and a direct mapping is not mandated.
One convention that is often used, however, is to populate this field with the same value as the Tunnel Sender Address.
The examples below follow that convention.
Note that these are only examples.
For a co routed bidirectional LSP signaled from A1 to Z9, the mapping to the GMPLS 5 tuple is as follows:
Address   Z9 Node ID    Tunnel ID   A1 Tunnel Num
An associated bidirectional LSP between two nodes A1 and Z9 consists of two unidirectional LSPs, one from A1 to Z9 and one from Z9 to A1.
In situations where a mapping to the RSVP TE 5 tuples is required, the following mappings are used.
For the A1 to Z9 LSP, the mapping would be:
Address   Z9 Node ID    Tunnel ID   A1 Tunnel Num
A1 LSP Num Likewise, the Z9 to A1 LSP, the mapping would be:
Z9 Node ID    Tunnel Sender Address
Pseudowire Path Identifiers Pseudowire signaling
(RFC 4447 [6]) defines two FECs used to signal pseudowires.
Of these, the Generalized PWid FEC (type 129) along with AII Type 2 as defined in RFC 5003 [3] fits the identification requirements of MPLS TP.
In an MPLS TP environment, a PW is identified by a set of identifiers that can be mapped directly to the elements required by the Generalized PWid FEC (type 129) and AII Type 2.
To distinguish this identifier from other Pseudowire Identifiers, we call this a Pseudowire Path Identifier (PW Path ID).
The AII Type 2 is composed of three fields.
These are the Global ID, the Prefix, and the AC ID.
The Global ID used in this document is identical to the Global ID defined in RFC 5003.
The Node ID is used as the Prefix.
The AC ID is as defined in RFC 5003.
To complete the Generalized PWid FEC (type 129), all that is required is an Attachment Group Identifier (AGI).
That field is exactly as specified in RFC 4447.
(bidirectional) pseudowire consists of a pair of unidirectional LSPs, one in each direction.
Thus, for signaling, the Generalized PWid FEC (type 129) has a notion of Source AII (SAII) and Target AII (TAII).
These terms are used relative to the direction of the LSP, i.e., the SAII is assigned to the end that allocates the PW label for a given direction, and the TAII to the other end.
In a purely configured environment, when referring to the entire PW, this distinction is not critical.
That is, a Generalized PWid FEC (type 129) of AGIa::AIIb::AIIc is equivalent to AGIa::AIIc::AIIb.
We note that in a signaled environment, the required convention in RFC 4447 is that at a particular end point, the AII associated with that end point comes first.
The complete PW Path ID is: AGI::A1 {Global ID::Node ID::AC ID}:: Z9 {Global ID::Node ID::AC ID}.
In a signaled environment the LSP from A1 to Z9 would be initiated with a label request from A1 to Z9 with the fields of the Generalized PWid FEC (type 129) completed as follows:
A1 {Global ID::Node ID::AC ID}
The LSP from Z9 to A1 would signaled with: AGI   AGI SAII
{Global ID::Node ID::AC ID} TAII   A1 {Global ID::Node ID::AC
In MPLS TP, a Maintenance Entity Group (MEG) represents an entity that requires management and defines a relationship between a set of maintenance points.
A maintenance point is either a Maintenance Entity Group End Point (MEP), a Maintenance Entity Group Intermediate Point (MIP), or a Pseudowire Segment End Point.
Within the context of a MEG, MEPs and MIPs must be uniquely identified.
This section defines a means of uniquely identifying Maintenance Entity Groups and Maintenance Entities.
It also uniquely defines MEPs and MIPs within the context of a Maintenance Entity Group.
Maintenance Entity Group Identifiers Maintenance Entity Group Identifiers (MEG IDs) are required for MPLS TP sections, LSPs, and Pseudowires.
The formats were chosen to follow the IP compatible identifiers defined above.
MPLS TP Section MEG IDs MPLS TP allows a hierarchy of sections.
See "MPLS TP Data Plane Architecture"
Sections above layer 0 are MPLS TP LSPs.
These use their MPLS TP LSP MEG IDs defined in Section 7.1.2.
IP compatible MEG IDs for MPLS TP sections at layer 0 are formed by concatenating the two IF IDs of the corresponding section using the A1/Z9 ordering.
For example: A1 IF ID::Z9
IF ID Where the Section MEG ID needs to be globally unique, this is accomplished by using globally unique Node IDs as defined above.
Thus, a globally unique Section MEG ID becomes: A1 {Global ID::IF ID}::Z9 {Global ID::IF ID} 7.1.2.
MPLS TP LSP MEG IDs A MEG pertains to a unique MPLS TP LSP.
IP compatible MEG IDs for MPLS TP LSPs are simply the corresponding LSP IDs; however, the A1/Z9 ordering MUST be used.
For bidirectional co routed LSPs, the format of the LSP ID is found in Section 5.2.1.
For associated bidirectional LSPs, the format is in Section 5.2.2.
We note that while the two identifiers are syntactically identical, they have different semantics.
This semantic difference needs to be made clear.
For instance, if both an MPLS TP LSP ID and MPLS TP LSP MEG IDs are to be encoded in TLVs, different types need to be assigned for these two identifiers.
Pseudowire MEG IDs For Pseudowires
, a MEG pertains to a single PW.
The IP compatible MEG ID for a PW is simply the corresponding PW Path ID; however, the A1/Z9 ordering MUST be used.
The PW Path ID is described in Section 6.
We note that while the two identifiers are syntactically identical, they have different semantics.
This semantic difference needs to be made clear.
For instance, if both a PW Path ID and a PW MEG ID are to be encoded in TLVs, different types need to be assigned for these two identifiers.
Maintenance Entity Group End Point Identifiers 7.2.1.
MPLS TP Section MEP IDs IP compatible MEP IDs for MPLS TP sections above layer
0 are their MPLS TP LSP MEP IDs.
IP compatible MEP IDs for MPLS TP sections at layer 0 are simply the IF IDs of each end of the section.
For example, for a section whose MEG ID is: A1 IF ID::Z9
IF ID the Section MEP ID at A1 would be: A1 IF ID and the Section MEP ID at Z9 would be: Z9 IF ID.
Where the Section MEP ID needs to be globally unique, this is accomplished by using globally unique Node IDs as defined above.
Thus, a globally unique Section MEP ID becomes: Global ID::IF ID.
MPLS TP LSP MEP ID
In order to automatically generate MEP IDs for MPLS TP LSPs, we use the elements of identification that are unique to an end point.
This ensures that MEP IDs are unique for all LSPs within an operator.
When Tunnels or LSPs cross operator boundaries, these are made unique by pre pending them with the operator's Global ID.
The MPLS TP LSP MEP ID is:
Node ID::Tunnel Num::LSP Num where the Node ID is the node in which the MEP is located and Tunnel Num is the tunnel number unique to that node.
In the case of co routed bidirectional LSPs, the single LSP Num is used at both ends.
In the case of associated bidirectional LSPs, the LSP Num is the one unique to where the MEP resides.
In situations where global uniqueness is required, this becomes: Global ID::Node
MEP IDs for Pseudowires Like MPLS TP LSPs, Pseudowire end points (T PEs) require MEP IDs.
In order to automatically generate MEP IDs for PWs, we simply use the AGI plus the AII associated with that end of the PW.
Thus, a MEP ID for a Pseudowire T PE takes the form:
ID::AC ID where the Node ID is the node in which the MEP is located and the AC ID is the AC ID of the Pseudowire at that node.
Maintenance Entity Group Intermediate Point Identifiers For a MIP that is associated with a particular interface
, we simply use the IF ID (see Section 4) of the interfaces that are cross  connected.
This allows MIPs to be independently identified in one node where a per interface MIP model is used.
If only a per node MIP model is used, then one MIP is configured.
In this case, the MIP ID is formed using the Node ID and an IF Num of 0.
This document describes an information model and, as such, does not introduce security concerns.
Protocol specifications that describe use of this information model, however, may introduce security risks and concerns about authentication of participants.
For this reason, the writers of protocol specifications for the purpose of describing implementation of this information model need to describe security and authentication concerns that may be raised by the particular mechanisms defined and how those concerns may be addressed.
Uniqueness of the identifiers from this document is guaranteed by the assigner (e.g., a Global ID is unique based on the assignment of ASNs from IANA and
both a Node ID and an IF Num are unique based on the assignment by an operator).
Failure by an assigner to use unique values within the specified scoping for any of the identifiers defined herein could result in operational problems.
For example, a non unique MEP value could result in failure to detect a mis merged LSP.
Protocol specifications that utilize the identifiers defined herein need to consider the implications of guessable identifiers and, where there is a security implication, SHOULD give advice on how to make identifiers less guessable.
