Abstract This document specifies the rsync Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) scheme.
Introduction URIs were previously defined in RFC 2396, which was obsoleted by RFC 3986 [RFC3986].
The procedures for registering new URI schemes are defined in RFC 4395 [RFC4395].
The rsync utility provides fast incremental file transfer [rsync].
This document defines a URI scheme for rsync.
This section contains the registration template for the rsync URI scheme in accordance with RFC 4395 [RFC4395].
This URI scheme is for the rsync protocol using TCP as the transport protocol.
Other transports, such as rsync over SSH, are not supported by this URI scheme.
rsync Status: provisional URI scheme syntax:
An rsync URI describes a source or destination for the rsync application including a hostname, path, and optional user and port.
The generic form of the rsync URI is: rsync://[user@]host[:PORT]/Source
The rsync URI follows the general syntax from RFC 3986 and is defined by the following ABNF [RFC5234]
See RFC 3986 for the definition ; of hier part URI scheme semantics: An rsync URI may be used as either a source or destination for the rsync application.
If the port is not specified, it defaults to 873.
Encoding considerations: Since the rsync URI is defined using standard elements from RFC 3986, no special encoding considerations are present.
Applications/protocols that use this URI scheme name: The only application that uses rsync URIs is rsync.
Interoperability considerations: Since only one application is expected to make use of rsync URIs, this URI scheme is expected to have few interoperability concerns.
Section 7 of RFC 3986 describes general security considerations for URI schemes.
The considerations about reliability and consistency, malicious construction, rare IP address formats, sensitive information, and semantic attacks all apply to rsync URIs.
The considerations about transcoding do not apply.
Given how rsync is regularly used, it is expected that most applications will not be bothered by data accessed via a given rsync URI changing over time.
> References: see Section 5.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the rsync provisional URI scheme using the template in Section 2. 4.
Many security considerations for the usage of URIs are discussed in Section 7 of [RFC3986].
The considerations about reliability and consistency, malicious construction, rare IP address formats, sensitive information, and semantic attacks all apply to rsync URIs.
The considerations about transcoding do not apply.
The rsync URI scheme has no particularly unique security considerations.
The security considerations of the rsync protocol are not covered in this document.
