none NETWORK INFORMATION CENTER SCHEDULE FOR NETWORK USERS
The Network Information Center has planned to provide service for network users on a regular basis Monday through Friday.
This service will begin on Monday, October 4, 1971.
system not available This schedule is temporary and subject to change.
The system is available on an irregular basis on weekends.
Those periods marked as available on an irregular basis are generally devoted to system development.
Any user may be asked to log off on short notice.
As soon as the user's Telnet connection is established to the NIC, the system herald will be printed, followed immediately by a brief (possibly null) message to network users.
This message will contain any items that are of particular interest to network users.
use your site ident as the user name the password is ARPA use an account number consisting of site ident your last name for example, if we receive the string log ucla nmc arpa ucla postel the user will be logged in as John Postel from UCLA After logging in,
the (possibly null) system message common to all logins will be printed.
If you experience any trouble getting into the NIC, call us via the telephone numbers listed below.
If the number is not listed as a direct dial, you must contact your operator and ask for the appro  priate Zenith or Enterprise number.
If the operator is unfamiliar with the use of Enterprise or Zenith numbers, ask to speak to the supervisor.
Dick Watson for administrative problems.
John Melvin vor NCP or Telnet problems.
Marily Auerbach or Dirk van Nouhuys for TNLS problems.
If NIC personnel do not answer, a local answering service will take the call.
Give the name of the person to whom your question is directed and your question or comment.
We will contact the answering service every morning and reply as soon as possible.
, 329 0740 CD Group AMES ILLIAC
Campus Computing Network UCLA NMC
[ This RFC was put into machine readable form for entry ]
[ into the online RFC archives by Sander van Malssen 7/97 ]
