Abstract This document modifies the "Unassigned" number space in the IANA "OSPFv3 Instance ID Address Family Values" registry by dividing it in two halves
one half Unassigned but managed via Standards Action, and the other Reserved for Private Use.
Introduction [RFC5838] defined the "OSPFv3 Instance ID Address Family Values" registry for the purpose of mapping OSPFv3 Instance IDs to different address families.
The following table lists the value ranges that were allocated for [RFC5838] and Unassigned.
Unicast AF dependent on local
IPv6 Multicast AFs dependent on local
IPv4 Unicast AFs dependent on local policy
IPv4 Multicast AFs dependent on local
In some networks, additional OSPFv3 instances may be required to operationally identify specific applications.
This need requires a pool of Instance IDs that the operator may locally assign for that purpose.
For example, [OSPF EMBED] describes an application in which IPv4  embedded IPv6 addresses
[RFC6052] are used to transport IPv4 packets over an IPv6 network.
While the IPv4 embedded IPv6 addresses do in fact represent IPv6 destinations, it would be operationally beneficial to be able to easily identify the specific application by having a separate space to do so.
This benefit is enabled by the allocation of a range of Private Use Instance IDs.
This document modifies the IANA "OSPFv3 Instance ID Address Family Values" registry by designating a range as Reserved for Private Use.
For the remaining unassigned values, the registration procedure is Standards Action.
Instance ID Address Family Values Registry Update
The IANA "OSPFv3 Instance ID Address Family Values" registry has been updated so that Instance IDs from 192 255 are Reserved for Private Use [RFC5226].
For the remaining unassigned values (128 191), the registration procedure is Standards Action.
This document requests the modification of the "OSPFv3 Instance ID Address Family Values" registry as described in Section 2.
The reference to [RFC5838] has been removed from the registry for the modified ranges.
This document modifies an IANA registry defined in [RFC5838].
It does not introduce any new security issues.
