Abstract This document specifies a Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP) shared message type for defining future extensions and conducting experiments without consuming a LISP packet type codepoint for each extension.
It also defines a registry for LISP Packet Type allocations, thus updating RFC 6830.
The Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP) base specification, [RFC6830], defines a set of primitives that are identified with a packet type code.
Several extensions have been proposed to add more LISP functionalities.
For example, new message types are proposed in [LISP DDT], [LISP MN EXT], [LISP BULK], [NAT LISP], or [LISP SUBSCRIBE].
It is expected that additional LISP extensions will be proposed in the future.
In order to ease the tracking of LISP message types, this document proposes to create a "LISP Packet Types" IANA registry (see Section 5).
Because of the limited type space [RFC6830] and the need to conduct experiments to assess new LISP extensions, this document specifies a shared LISP extension message type and proposes a procedure for registering LISP shared extension sub types (see Section 3).
Concretely, one single LISP message type code is dedicated to future LISP extensions; sub types are used to uniquely identify a given LISP extension making use of the shared LISP extension message type.
These identifiers are selected by the author(s) of the corresponding LISP specification that introduces a new LISP extension message type.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
LISP Shared Extension Message Type Figure 1 depicts the common format of the LISP shared extension message.
The type field MUST be set to 15 (see Section 5).
LISP Shared Extension Message Type The "Sub type" field conveys a unique identifier that MUST be registered with IANA (see Section 5.2).
The exact structure of the 'extension specific' portion of the message is specified in the corresponding specification document.
This document does not introduce any additional security issues other than those discussed in [RFC6830].
LISP Packet Types IANA has created a new protocol registry for LISP Packet Types, numbered 0 15.
The registry is initially populated with the following values:
LISP Encapsulated Control Message  8
The values in the ranges 5 7 and 9 14 can be assigned via Standards Action [RFC5226].
Documents that request for a new LISP packet type may indicate a preferred value in the corresponding IANA sections.
Sub Types IANA has created the "LISP Shared Extension Message Type Sub types" registry.
No initial values are assigned at the creation of the registry; (0 4095) are available for future assignments.
The values in the range 0 1023 are assigned via Standards Action.
This range is provisioned to anticipate, in particular, the exhaustion of the LISP Packet types.
The values in the range 1024 4095 are assigned on a First Come, First Served (FCFS) basis.
The registration procedure should provide IANA with the desired codepoint and a point of contact; providing a short description (together with an acronym, if relevant) of the foreseen usage of the extension message is also encouraged.
