Abstract The cellular telephone industry has defined a service known as the Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS).
This service uses formats and protocols that are similar to, but differ in key ways from, those used in Internet mail.
One important difference between MMS and Internet Mail is that MMS uses headers that start with "X Mms " to carry a variety of user agent  and server related information elements.
This document specifies how to exchange messages between these two services, including mapping information elements as used in MMS X Mms   headers as well as delivery and disposition reports, to and from that used in SMTP and Internet message headers.
This document describes how to exchange messages between Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) systems (as defined by [3GPP][3GPP2][OMA]) and Internet mail systems (that is, [SMTP] and [Msg Fmt]).
This includes the translation of message formats, message header elements,
message delivery reports [DSN Msg], and message disposition reports [MDN].
The MMS architecture [Stage 2] and specifications [Stage 3] refer to interfaces as reference points named MMx.
For example, MM1 is the client server interface, MM4 is the server server interface, and MM3 is an interface to "external" or non MMS systems.
The specification in this document can be used for message exchange between any system that uses Internet message formats and protocols and an MMS system; from the perspective of the MMS system, reference point MM3 is used.
This document includes support for voice messages specified by the Voice Profile for Internet Mail [VPIM].
The VPIM specification allows voice messages to be exchanged between voice mail systems using the Internet mail format [Msg Fmt] and transported via [SMTP].
Thus, the MMS MM3 interface supports the ability to exchange voice messages between an MMS system and a voice mail system.
Note that such use is distinct from voice media being part of a user composed multimedia message.
Note that MM3 can also be used for interworking with "external" (non MMS) systems other than Internet mail, such as Short Messaging Service (SMS) and access to external mail stores (such as a voice mail system).
This specification does not address these other uses or sub interfaces of MM3; it is only concerned with Internet mail interworking and specifically exchange of messages.
All MM3 Stage 2 [Stage 2] functions are supported except for reply charging and sender address hiding.
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "REQUIRED", "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in "Key Words for Use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" [KEYWORDS].
The portion of an [SMTP] message's Content  following the Header (that is, following the  first blank line).
The Body may contain  structured parts and sub parts, each of which  may have its own Header and Body.
The Body  contains information intended for the message  recipient (human or software).
The portion of an SMTP message that is  delivered.
The Content consists of a Header  and a Body.
Feedback information to an originator User  Agent by a recipient User Agent about Message Disposition
handling of an original message.
The portion of an SMTP message not included in  the Content, that is, not in the Header or in  the Body.
While some of it may be copied into  the Content on delivery, envelope information  exists only while the message is in transit,  and contains information used by SMTP agents
The first part of an SMTP message's Content.
The Header is separated from the Body by a  blank line.
The message Header contains  information used by User Agents.
For purposes  of this document, an MMS Relay/Server acts as  a gateway when it receives or sends messages  via Internet mail.
A server that accepts messages  from User Agents and processes them, either delivering  them locally or relaying to an MTA.
A server that implements [SMTP].
It is assumed that the reader is already familiar with the contents of the 3GPP2 MMS Specification Overview [Overview]
, MMS Stage 1 (requirements)
[Stage 1] and Stage 2 (architecture and abstract messages)
[Stage 2], and 3GPP/3GPP2 Stage 3 (protocols)
It is also assumed that the reader is familiar with Internet mail, especially RFC 2821 [SMTP] and RFC 2822
Mapping Between MMS and Internet Mail
This section defines the interworking between MMS Relay/Servers and External Servers using native [SMTP].
That is, information elements are exchanged using standard Internet message [Msg Fmt] header fields, such as those in [Hdrs], and standard [SMTP] elements.
SMTP and Internet mail extensions are used for features such as delivery reports, message expiration, and discovery of server support for optional features.
When sending a message to an Internet mail system, the MMS Relay/Server MUST convert the MM if required, and MUST comply with the requirements of [SMTP].
The MMS Relay/Server SHOULD use the information elements associated with the MM to define the control information (Internet message header fields and SMTP envelope values) needed for the transfer protocol.
Section 2.1.3 lists the mappings between X Mms   headers and Internet message header fields and SMTP values.
Delivery and read report MMs SHOULD be converted to standard Internet message report format (multipart/report).
In addition to converting Internet Message reports, the MMS Relay/Server MUST generate delivery and read report MMs for received messages as appropriate.
See Section 2.1.4 for more information.
When receiving a message from an Internet mail system, the MMS Relay/Server converts incoming messages to the MM format used within the receiving system.
The MMS Relay/Server converts control information received from the Internet mail server into appropriate information elements of an MM.
Section 2.1.3 lists the mappings between X Mms   headers and Internet message header fields and SMTP values.
Standard Internet message report format (multipart/report) messages MAY be converted to delivery or read report MMs, as appropriate.
In addition to converting report MMs, implementations conforming to this document MUST generate standard Internet message delivery and disposition reports for received Internet messages as appropriate.
See Section 2.1.4 for more information.
The mappings between MMS elements and SMTP/Internet message elements ([SMTP] parameters, [Msg Fmt] headers, and [DSN Msg] fields) are summarized in table 1 below, and detailed in subsequent sections.
The "MMS Headers" are from [OMA MMS].
Note that only information elements that need to be mapped are listed.
[Msg Fmt] headers not listed here SHOULD be passed unaltered.
X Mms Message  (of PDU)
The [VPIM] 'Sensitivity' header element indicates the privacy requested by the message originator (values are "personal" or "private"); per [VPIM], a message recipient MUST NOT forward a message with a 'Sensitivity' header.
Since sensitivity is not an MMS feature, any messages that contain a 'Sensitivity:' header SHOULD NOT be sent to an MMS system.
[VPIM] specifies how conforming messages are identified.
Conversion of Messages from MMS to Internet Format 3GPP MMS Version
The 'X Mms 3GPP MMS Version:' header, if present, SHOULD be removed.
The 'X Mms Message Type:' header, if present, SHOULD be removed.
Transaction ID The 'X Mms Transaction Id:'
header, if present, SHOULD be removed.
If not present, it MUST be created, with a unique value, per [Msg Fmt].
To facilitate the case where an MMS message traverses the Internet prior to returning to an MMS system, implementations might wish to retain the 'X Mms Message
Such systems should be aware that headers that begin with "X " might be removed during transit through Internet MTAs.
The address of each recipient MUST be transmitted in the [SMTP] envelope as a RCPT TO value.
All disclosed recipients SHOULD also appear in a '
If none are present, a 'To:' header SHOULD be created using empty group syntax whose name gives an indication to a human reader, for example, 'To:  undisclosed  recipients:;'.
To:' header SHOULD NOT appear more than once.
The 'Cc:' header SHOULD NOT appear more than once.
Each recipient address MUST obey the length restrictions per [SMTP].
Current Internet Message format requires that only 7 bit US ASCII characters be present in headers.
Non 7 bit characters in an address domain must be encoded with [IDN].
If there are any non 7 bit characters in the local part of an address, the message MUST be rejected.
Non 7 bit characters elsewhere in a header MUST be encoded according to [Hdr Enc].
All recipient addresses in the [SMTP] envelope must be fully  qualified in accordance with [SMTP].
In particular, messages MUST NOT be sent to an Internet mail system with an unqualified E.164 number (i.e., a number with no domain) instead of a fully qualified domain name.
Unqualified E.164 numbers MUST NOT be used.
The address of the message sender SHOULD appear in the 'From:' header.
The address of the message sender for all user generated messages ('X Mms Message Class:  Personal')
SHOULD be transmitted in the [SMTP] envelope as the MAIL FROM value.
The return addresses in the [SMTP] envelope must be fully qualified in accordance with [SMTP].
In particular, messages MUST NOT be sent to an Internet mail system with an E.164 number instead of a fully  qualified domain name.
that qualified E.164 numbers, that is, those that contain an E.164 number as the local part of an address that also includes a domain, are acceptable.
The address(es) in the 'From:' header SHOULD be in the form of fully qualified domains.
Unqualified E.164 numbers SHOULD NOT be used.
The MAIL FROM value MUST be set to null for all automatically generated messages.
This includes reports, "out of office" replies, etc.
Current Internet message format requires that only 7 bit US ASCII characters be present in headers.
Non 7 bit characters in an address domain must be encoded with [IDN].
If there are any Non 7 bit characters in the local part of an address, the message MUST be rejected.
Non 7 bit characters elsewhere in a header MUST be encoded according to [Hdr Enc].
Note that it would be possible to define an [SMTP] extension to permit transmission of unencoded 8 bit characters, but in the absence of such an extension [Hdr Enc] MUST be used.
The sender address MUST obey the length restrictions of [SMTP].
The 'Content Type:' header SHOULD be preserved.
The 'X Mms Message Class:' header MAY be retained in order to provide information on the source of the message.
bulk' header MAY be inserted for class auto or class advertisement.
(Class personal and class informational do not require special handling.)
The 'X Mms Expiry:' header, if present, SHOULD be removed.
The remaining time until the message is considered expired SHOULD be transmitted in the [SMTP] envelope by using the DELIVER BY extension with a by mode of "R", as specified in [Deliver By].
Note that the [SMTP] DELIVER BY extension carries time remaining until expiration; each server decrements the value by the amount of time
it has possessed the message.
header may contain either the absolute time at which the message is considered expired or the relative time until the message is considered expired.
The 'X Mms Delivery Time:' header, if present, SHOULD be removed.
Future delivery is a message submission (e.g., [Submission]), not message relay feature.
Delivery report request Requests for delivery status notifications (DSNs)
SHOULD be transmitted in the [SMTP] envelope by using the DSN extension as specified in [DSN SMTP] to request "success" or "none" notification (depending on the value of the 'X Mms Delivery Report' header).
When the NOTIFY extension is used, the unaltered recipient address SHOULD be transmitted as the ORCPT value.
The 'X Mms Delivery Report:' header, if present, SHOULD be removed.
The message sender's importance value (also called "priority", although this can be confused with class of service values)
SHOULD be transmitted using an 'Importance:' header.
Suggested mappings are shown in Table 2: 2.1.3.2.1.
The 'X Mms Priority:' header, if present, SHOULD be removed.
Sender visibility Support for sender address hiding is not currently supported.
A message that contains an 'X Mms Sender Visibility:' header with a value of 'Hide' SHOULD be rejected.
The 'X Mms Sender Visibility:' header, if present, SHOULD be removed.
Read reply request A request for a read reply SHOULD be transmitted using a 'Disposition Notification To:' header as specified in [MDN].
header, if present, SHOULD be removed.
Reply charging Reply charging permission and acceptance are complex issues requiring both user agent and server support.
Misapplied reply charging may cause incorrect billing.
Until the security issues have been properly addressed, reply charging SHOULD NOT be honored when using this interface.
X  Mms Reply Charging Size:', and 'X Mms Reply
Charging Id:' headers MAY be removed.
Messages containing a reply charging usage request ('X  Mms Reply
Charging Id:' and 'X Mms Reply Charging: accepted' or 'X  Mms Reply Charging:
accepted (text only)' headers) SHOULD be rejected.
The current Internet message format requires that only 7 bit US ASCII characters be present.
Other characters MUST be encoded according to [Hdr Enc].
Note that it is possible for an [SMTP] extension to be defined that would permit transmission of unencoded 8 bit characters, but in the absence of such an extension, [Hdr Enc] MUST be used.
Resending A message may be resent to one or more new recipients.
It may be resent more than once, each time
new 'Resent ' headers are added at the top of the existing headers.
Thus, if more than one series of 'Resent ' headers are present, the original series is the last; the most recent is the first.
Forward counter An 'X Mms Forward Counter:'
header, if present, SHOULD be removed.
The 'Resent Count:' header is NOT RECOMMENDED.
Loop control is usually done by counting 'Received' headers, which are more general than 'Resent ' headers.
Previously Sent Information MMS lists the resending history of a message in two headers:  '
X Mms Previously Sent By:'  contains a number followed by one or more addresses.
X Mms Previously Sent Date and Time:' contains a number followed by a date time.
With both headers, the number "0" is used for the entry that corresponds to the original submission of the message, with higher values being used for each subsequent resending.
The final (most recent) resending information is in the 'From:' and 'Date:' headers.
There is also an 'X Mms Forward Counter:' that indicates how many times the message has been resent.
X Mms Previously Sent Date and  Time:', and 'X Mms Forward Counter:'  headers, if present, SHOULD be removed.
The information contained in them SHOULD be translated into [Msg Fmt] headers as follows:
The 'X Mms Previously Sent Date and Time:' header whose value starts with "0" SHOULD be used to create a 'Date:' header, converting the date and time from HTTP date [HTTP] to date time [Msg Fmt].
The 'X  Mms Previously Sent By:' header whose value starts with "0" SHOULD be used to create a 'From:' header.
To:' header SHOULD be created using list syntax with a value of "unrecoverable recipients" and no mailboxes.
A 'Message ID:' header SHOULD be created.
X Mms Previously Sent Date and Time:' headers whose value starts with "1" or a larger value are mapped to 'Resent Date:'  headers.
Previously Sent By:' headers whose value starts with "1" or
a larger value are mapped to 'Resent By:' headers.
X Mms Forward Counter: 2
X Mms Previously Sent Date and Time: 0, Fri, 01
GMT X Mms Previously Sent By:   0, General Failure
<mfail@example.mil> X Mms Previously Sent Date and Time: 1,
GMT X Mms Previously Sent By:   1, Colonel Corn <gcorn@example.mil
<99887766.112233@mail.example.org> is mapped to an Internet mail message: Resent Date:
Fri, 1 Apr 2005 18:02:03  0800 Resent From: L. Eva Message <
Fri, 1 Apr 2005 08:02:03  0000 Resent From:
'Received:' Headers When a message is gatewayed from MMS to Internet mail, a 'Received:' header MUST be added as per [SMTP].
The "with" clause should specify "MMS".
A message MAY be rejected if the number of 'Received:' headers exceeds a locally defined maximum, which MUST conform to [SMTP] Section 6.2 and SHOULD be no less than 100.
Privacy Note that MMS systems do not currently support the 'Privacy' header field as described by [VPIM].
Content The message content appears in the message body.
Note that Internet message format requires that line endings be encoded as US ASCII CR LF octets
; thus, charset encodings that do not have this property cannot be used in text/  body parts.
(They may be used in other body parts, but only when they are suitably encoded or when binary transmission has been negotiated, e.g., [BINARY].)
In particular, MMS allows UTF 16, whereas the Internet message format does not.
UTF 16 encoding MUST be translated to UTF 8 or another charset and encoding that is suitable for use in Internet message format/protocols.
Conversion of Messages from Internet to MMS Format 3GPP
'X Mms 3GPP MMS Version:'
An 'X Mms Message Type:'
header SHOULD be used in accordance with the specific MMS interface (e.g., MM1, MM4).
header SHOULD be used in accordance with the specific MMS interface (e.g., MM1, MM4).
If not present, it MUST be created, with a unique value.
To:' and 'Cc:' headers MUST be retained.
Each recipient contained in the [SMTP] envelope (RCPT TO values) MUST be considered a recipient of the message.
Recipients who appear in address headers but not the [SMTP] envelope MUST be ignored.
Recipients who appear in the [SMTP] envelope but do not appear in headers are considered "blind" (Bcc) recipients; such recipients MUST NOT be added to message headers (including address and trace headers) unless there is only one recipient total.
The 'From:' header MUST be retained.
The complete 'Content Type:' header (including any parameters) SHOULD be preserved.
An 'X Mms Message Class: personal' header MAY be created for all received messages with a non null return path (MAIL FROM value in the SMTP envelope).
An 'X Mms Message Class:
auto' header MAY be created for messages with a null return path.
Time of Expiry An 'X Mms Expiry:' header SHOULD be created if the message contains a relative time to expiration in the DELIVER BY extension with a by  mode of "R", as specified in [Deliver By].
If the by mode is "N", a "relayed" DSN MUST be issued per [Deliver By] and an 'X Mms Expiry:' header SHOULD NOT be created.
Delivery report request An 'X Mms Delivery Report:' header SHOULD be created for messages that request 'success' or 'none' delivery status notification by use of the DSN extension as specified in [DSN SMTP].
Requests for 'delay' notifications or non default actions, such as that only the message headers should be returned, cannot be mapped onto MMS headers and thus SHOULD be ignored.
The message sender's importance value (also called "priority", although this can be confused with class of service values) is expressed with an 'Importance:' header.
Historically, some clients used the older and non standard 'X Priority:' header for this purpose.
As a result, some clients generate both.
An 'X Priority:' or 'Importance:' header, if present, SHOULD be replaced with an 'X Mms Priority:' header.
If both headers are present, 'Importance:' SHOULD be used.
Suggested mappings are shown in Table 3: 2.1.3.3.1.
Sender visibility Support for sender address hiding is not currently supported.
Read reply request A request for a read reply contained in a 'Disposition Notification  To:' header as specified in [MDN] SHOULD be replaced with an 'X Mms  Read Reply:' header.
Resending Mapping from 'Resent ' and other
[Msg Fmt] headers to 'X Mms
Previously Sent ' headers SHOULD be done as follows:
The original 'From:' header is mapped to an '
By:' header with a leading "0" value.
The value of the top most 'Resent From:' header is mapped to the 'From:'  header.
The value of each subsequent 'Resent From:' header is mapped to an 'X Mms
Previously Sent By:' header with the next larger leading value.
header is mapped to an '
X Mms Previously Sent  Date and Time:' header with a leading "0" value.
Note that the value is also converted from date time syntax [Msg Fmt] to HTTP date syntax [HTTP].
The value of the top most 'Resent Date:' header is mapped to the 'Date:' header.
The value of each subsequent 'Date:' header is mapped to an 'X Mms Previously Sent Date and Time:' header with the next larger leading value.
If one or more 'Resent Message ID:' headers are present, the top most one SHOULD be mapped to 'Message ID:'; otherwise, the 'Message ID:'
An 'X Mms Forward Counter:' header SHOULD be created when 'Resent ' headers have been mapped to 'X Mms Previously Sent ' headers.
Its value SHOULD be the number of 'Resent ' blocks that existed prior to mapping.
Is resent by Colonel Corn to L. Eva Message:
Fri, 1 Apr 2005 16:02:03  0800
L. Eva then resends to her MMS device:
Fri, 1 Apr 2005 18:02:03  0800 Resent From: L. Eva Message <
Fri, 1 Apr 2005 16:02:03  0800
This would be mapped to an MMS message as:
X Mms Previously Sent Date and Time: 0, Fri, 01
GMT X Mms Previously Sent By:   0, General Failure
<mfail@example.mil> X Mms Previously Sent Date and Time: 1,
GMT X Mms Previously Sent By:   1, Colonel Corn <gcorn@example.mil
<99887766.112233@mail.example.org> Note that the original 'From:' and 'Date:' values were moved to 'X  Mms Previously Sent By:' and 'X Mms Previously Sent Date and Time:' headers with a leading "0" value.
The first 'Resent From:' and 'Resent Date:'
values were moved to a second set of 'X Mms
Previously Sent ' headers, with a leading "1" value.
Received:' Headers Each system that processes a message
SHOULD add a 'Received:' header as per [SMTP].
A message MAY be rejected if the number of 'Received:' headers exceeds a locally defined maximum, which MUST conform to [SMTP] Section 6.2 and SHOULD be no less than 100.
The 'Sensitivity:' header field (value   "personal" or "private")
[VPIM] indicates the desire of a voice message originator to send the message contents to the original recipient list with assurance that the message will not be forwarded further by either the messaging system or the actual message recipient(s).
Since sensitivity is not an MMS feature, any messages that contain a 'Sensitivity:' header MUST NOT be sent to an MMS system.
The associated negative delivery status report MUST include the extended status code [RESP] 5.6.0 as specified in [VPIM] ("Other or undefined protocol status") indicating that privacy could not be ensured.
The message content appears in the message body.
Report Generation and Conversion Internet message systems use the multipart/report MIME type for delivery and disposition reports as specified in [Report Fmt].
This format is a two  or three part MIME message; one part is a structured format describing the event being reported in an easy to parse format.
Specific reports have a format that is built on [Report Fmt].
Delivery reports are specified in [DSN Msg].
Message disposition reports, which include read reports, are specified in [MDN].
By contrast, MMS reports are plain text, with no defined structure specified.
This makes it difficult to convert from an MMS report to a standard Internet report.
An implementation conforming to this specification MUST convert reports received from one side (MMS or Internet mail) destined for the other.
In addition, reports MUST be generated as appropriate for messages received from either side.
For example, if an MM to be sent via Internet mail is not deliverable, a delivery status MM shall be generated.
Likewise, if an Internet message is received that cannot be further relayed or delivered, a delivery status report [DSN Msg] MUST be generated.
When creating delivery or disposition reports from MMS reports, the MMS report should be parsed to determine the reported event and time, status, and the headers of the referenced (original) message.
These elements, once determined, are used to populate the subparts of the delivery or disposition report.
The first subpart is of type text/plain, and contains a human readable explanation of the event.
This text may include a statement that the report was synthesized based on an MMS report.
The second subpart is of type report/delivery status (for delivery reports) or report/disposition  notification (for disposition reports).
This second part contains a structured itemization of the event.
The optional third subpart is of type message/rfc822 and includes the headers and optionally the body of the referenced (original) message.
Note that, per [DSN Msg], the 'DSN Gateway:'
field in delivery reports MUST be created.
Delivery Report Mapping from MMS to Internet Message Below
, Table 4 maps information elements from MMS delivery reports to the format specified in [DSN Msg].
Table 4:  Delivery Report Mappings (MMS to Internet Message)
failed (used for MMS status
expanded (SHOULD NOT be used)
When an MMS Relay/Server generates a [DSN Msg] in response to a message received using [SMTP] on MM3:
Top level header field '
To:' SHOULD be the [SMTP] return path of the message whose status is being reported.
Top level header field 'From:' SHOULD be the address of the recipient that the delivery report concerns.
The first part of the [DSN Msg] SHOULD include the MM Status Text field that would have been generated for an MM1 delivery report.
2.1.4.2 Delivery Report Mapping from Internet Message to MMS Below, Table 5 maps information elements from a delivery report as specified in [DSN Msg] to the format of an MMS delivery report.
Note that a single DSN that reports multiple recipients will result in several MMS delivery reports.
Read Report Mapping from MMS to Internet Message Below, Table 6 maps information elements from MMS read reports to the format specified in [MDN].
Read Report Mappings (MMS to Internet Message)
Information Element    MMS Delivery [MDN] Element
When an MMS Relay/Server generates an [MDN] in response to a message received using [SMTP] on MM3:
Top level header field '
To:' SHOULD be the value of the 'Disposition Notification To:' header field of the message whose disposition is being reported.
Top level header field 'From:' SHOULD be the address of the recipient that the read report concerns.
Disposition Report Mapping from Internet Message to MMS Below
, Table 7 maps information elements from a disposition report as specified in [MDN] to the format of an MMS read report.
Table 7:  Disposition Report Mappings (Internet Message to MMS)
Information Element MMS Read Report
Message Delivery Within Internet mail
, when [SMTP] is used and delivery reports are requested [DSN SMTP], delivery is considered to be acceptance of a message by the final server, that is, the server closest to the recipient.
When an MMS Relay/Server receives a message using [SMTP] and a delivery report is requested, the MMS Relay/Server MAY consider the message delivered when it has been sent to the MMS User Agent.
Both MMS and Internet mail have their own set of security risks and considerations.
This document specifies how to exchange messages between these two environments, so it is only appropriate to discuss considerations specific to this functionality, not those inherent in either environment.
When a message uses end to end security mechanisms such as [PGP] or S/MIME [SMIME], servers MUST be careful not to accidently destroy the integrity of the protected content (for example, by altering any text within the region covered by a signature while mapping between MMS and email).
[Mime Sec gw] discusses issues with use of such mechanisms in gateways.
Some MMS features contain inherently more risk than others, including reply charging and sender address hiding.
Support for these mechanisms is not included in this document.
IANA Considerations IANA has added "MMS" as one of the "WITH protocol types" under its "MAIL Parameters" registry.
The description is "Multimedia Messaging Service"; the reference is to this document.
