Desirability of a Network 1108 Service We have, at the University of Utah, a Univac 1108 that supports the Univac EXEC 8 system.
At the recent ICCC conference in Washington, there was some interest expressed in making this computer available to the ARPANET.
At present it is not so available.
Since there is communication currently between the 1108 and the Utah PDP 10, it would require minimal programming effort to make the 1109 available for network use.
We would appreciate your comments if you think this service would be desirable.
Please direct your comments to: Gregory Hicks Computer Science Department Merrill Engineering Building 3160
University of Utah Salt Lake City, Utah 84112 or to: Ed Sharp Director, Computer Center Merrill Engineering Building
3116 University of Utah Salt Lake City, Utah 84112
(1) a brief description of the services available.
(3) time schedule when the EXEC 8 system is available for use.
Facilities at the University of Utah
The university of Utah owns a large Univac 1108 computer system with six tape drives, seven high speed drums, 262 megabytes of on line storage, as well as communication equipment for low speed (teletype) timesharing and high speed (Remote Job Entry or RJE) batch terminals.
The Computer Center also has available a large (48" x 60")
high precision flatbed Plotter, an Optical Scanner and Digitizer.
remote terminals include RJE devices in Logan, Provo, and Salt Lake City (four terminals):
Montrose, Durango, Boise and Boulder City, as well as timesharing devices in several of the western states.
RJE terminals will shortly be ordered for Denver, Amarillo, Billings and Sacramento.
Additional ports have been ordered to allow for further timesharing use of the 1108.
The Center is open 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Computing rates are considerably lower than commercial rates and jobs generally cost less to process at the University than at other state facilities.
Available software include languages such as FORTAN, COBAL, SNOBOL, APL, BASIC, MAD, ALGOL, LISP, a Text Editor and an Assembler.
A wide variety of scientific and statistical routines are available, including the two best known statistical systems and an excellent set of mathematical subprograms.
Several simulation packages, as well as an LP program, are available for use.
These priorities apply to batch and remote batch jobs.
Teletype or interactive service is assigned a priority/rate equal to 6 cents above the lowest priority being accepted at the time of use.
Please see below for the time schedule of priorities.
TIME SCHEDULE OF PRIORITIES SUN.
The above schedule is for normal operating conditions.
If you are planning to do on site work a call to 581 6111 will confirm the current operation status of the facilities.
Normally, we expect to get all jobs with priority of 'R' or higher run overnight.
We cannot guarantee overnight turn around of priority S and below but every effort will be made to accommodate all work.
Charge    Requires special pricing Billed at $ Amount only.
[See PDF for diagram of Univac 1108 system.]
[This RFC was put into machine readable form for entry]
[into the online RFC archives by Helene Morin, Viagenie, 12/99]
