Abstract RSVP [RFC 2205] signaling messages typically include policy data objects, which in turn contain policy elements.
Policy elements may describe user and/or application information, which may be used by RSVP aware network elements to apply appropriate policy decisions to a traffic flow.
This memo details the usage of policy elements that provide application information.
Overview RSVP aware network elements may act as policy enforcement points (PEPs).
These work together with policy decision points (PDPs) to enforce QoS policy.
Briefly, PEPs extract policy information from RSVP signaling requests and compare the information against information stored by a PDP in a (possibly remotely located) policy database or directory.
A policy decision is made based on the results of the comparison.
One type of policy information describes the application on behalf of which an RSVP signaling request is generated.
When application policy information is available, network administrators are able to manage QoS based on application type.
So, for example, a network administrator may establish a policy that prioritizes known mission  critical applications over games.
This memo describes a structure for a policy element that can be used to identify application traffic flows.
The policy element includes a number of attributes, one of which is a policy locator.
This policy locator includes the following hierarchically ordered sub elements (in descending levels of hierarchy): 1. identifier that uniquely identifies the application vendor 2.
identifier of the application 3.
version number of the application 4.
An arbitrary number of sub application identifiers may be included in the policy locator.
An example of such an identifier is 'print transaction'.
This memo specifies the structure of the application policy element and proposes keywords for the sub elements at each level of the hierarchy.
It does not enumerate specific values for the sub  elements: such an enumeration is beyond the scope of this memo.
Simple Application Identity Policy Element Structure General application identity policy elements are defined in [RFC2752].
These are policy elements with a P type of AUTH APP.
Following the policy element header is a list of authentication attributes.
The first authentication attribute is of the A type POLICY LOCATOR.
The sub type of the POLICY LOCATOR attribute is of type ASCII DN [RFC1779] or UNICODE DN.
The actual attribute data is formatted as an X.500 distinguished name (DN), representing a globally unique identifier, the application, version number and sub application in a hierarchical structure.
The POLICY LOCATOR attribute contains keywords as described in section 2.
For further details on the format of the POLICY LOCATOR attribute, see [RFC2752].
The second authentication attribute is of the A type CREDENTIAL.
The sub type of the CREDENTIAL attribute is of type ASCII ID or UNICODE ID.
The actual attribute data is an ASCII or Unicode string representing the application name.
The following keywords are recommended although others MAY be used:
Unique Identifier (optional) APP  Application Name VER  Application Version Number SAPP Sub Application (optional)
The following are examples of conformant policy locators: "APP SAP, VER 1.1, SAPP Print" "GUID http://www.microsoft.com/apps, APP MyApplication, VER 1.2.3"
The APP, VER and SAPP attributes SHOULD describe the application to a human reader in as unique and unambiguous a way as possible.
The GUID attribute MAY be used when absolute uniqueness of application identification is required and its contents MUST be an identifier from a globally unique source (e.g. domain names as assigned by the corresponding registration authorities).
Note that publication of the chosen identifiers in a suitable format is strongly encouraged.
The proposed simple policy element does not guarantee that element is indeed associated with the application it claims to be associated with.
In order to provide such guarantees, it is necessary to sign applications.
Signed application policy elements may be proposed at a future date.
Note that, typically, the application policy element will be included in an RSVP message with an encrypted and authenticated user policy element.
A level of security is provided by trusting the application policy element only if the user policy element is trusted.
All RSVP integrity considerations apply to the message containing the application policy element.
