Abstract This document describes the encoding used in electronic mail [RFC822] and network news [RFC1036] messages over the Internet.
The 7 bit representation of GB 2312 Chinese text was specified by Fung Fung Lee of Stanford University [Lee89] and implemented in various software packages under different platforms (see appendix for a partial list of the available software packages that support this encoding method).
It is further tested and used in the usenet newsgroups alt.chinese.text and chinese.
as well as various other network forums with considerable success.
Future extensions of this encoding method can accommodate additional GB character sets and other east asian language character sets [Wei94].
The name given to this encoding is "HZ GB 2312", which is intended to be used in the "charset" parameter field of MIME headers (see [MIME1] and [MIME2]).
Introduction Chinese (and other east Asia languages)
characters are encoded with multiple bytes to guarantee sufficient coding space for the large number of glyphs these languages contain.
With the prolification of internetwork traffic around the world, it becomes necessary to define ways to facilitate the transfer of text in multiple byte character  set languages (hereafter as Chinese text) over internet.
There are two layers of concerns need to be addressed by any mechanism whose purpose is to transfer Chinese text over internet.
The first is on application layer, in which concerned applications should be able to recognize the encoding of the text and/or discern different character sets which might be mixed in the text and handle it accordingly.
The second layer is the actual transport of Chinese text between point A to point B over the Internet.
Because the prevailing mail transport protocol used over internet, the Simple Mail Transport Protocol (aka. SMTP) was designed originally for ASCII character set only, many internet mail agents are not 8 bit clean and therefore introduce challenges for any attempt to actually implement a mechanism for the transport of Chinese text over internet.
Here we describe a mechanism for transmission of Chinese text over IP network.
This described mechanism has being implemented by various software package dealing with multi language support and has been tested on USENET newsgroups and other types of internet forums over the last two years.
The test results shows that the HZ representation can pass through almost all existing mail delivery agents without being corrupted.
The HZ representation currently handles GB2312 80 Chinese character set only.
Further expansion to other Chinese encoding systems and to other East Asia Language is under consideration.
Description For an arbitrary mixed text with both Chinese coded text strings and ASCII text strings, we designate to two distinguishable text modes, ASCII mode and HZ mode, as the only two states allowed in the text.
At any given time, the text is in either one of these two modes or in the transition from one to the other.
In the HZ mode, only printable ASCII characters (0x21 0x7E) are meanful with the size of basic text unit being two bytes long.
The default mode is ASCII mode.
Each line of text starts with the default ASCII mode.
The escape sequences defined are as the following: ~
(Suppose there is no line size limit.)
This sentence is in ASCII.
(Suppose the maximum line size is 42.)
This sentence is in ASCII.
(Suppose a new line is started for every mode switch.)
This sentence is in ASCII.
The notational conventions used here are identical to those used in RFC 822 [RFC822].
The   (asterisk) convention is as follows:
l m something meaning at least l and at most m somethings, with l and m taking default values of 0 and infinity, respectively.
1 single byte char double byte segment
double byte seq 1 ( one of 94 one of 94 )
The name given to the HZ character encoding is "HZ GB 2312".
This name is intended to be used in MIME messages as follows:
Content Type: text/plain; charset HZ GB 2312
The HZ GB 2312 encoding is already in 7 bit form, so it is not necessary to use a Content Transfer Encoding header.
A GB code is a two byte character withe
the first byte is in the range of 0x21 0x77 and the second byte in the range 0x21 0x7E.
As the printable ASCII subset of characters are single byte character in the range of 0x21 0x7E, two printable ASCII characters can represent a two byte GB coded Chinese character if proper escape sequence is used to indicate the proper text mode.
This form the base of the above described HZ 7 bit representation methods.
Therefore, the HZ representation method described here posses the least probability of interfering with the host and network environment.
This is also a convenient for application for implementing the HZ coding method.
HZ representation method has been implemented in various Chinese software across computer hardware platforms.
It has also being tested for more than two years over USENET newsgroups, alt.chinese.text and chinese. , for the transmission of Chinese texts over the internet.
The original points of those transferred Chinese texts are geographically scattered around the world and under the constraints of vast different system and network environments.
Therefore, such a test group may well represent a rather complete sample of the real internet world.
The successful test of the HZ representation method therefore builds up the confidence that it is well suited for transmitting multi byte text messages over the internet.
Under HZ representation, ASCII text remain as 7 bit characters and therefore HZ representation together with the 7 bit ASCII character set can be viewed as forming a superset of characters.
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
Appendix: List of Software Implementing HZ Representation
In the following, we compiled a list on software packages support the HZ Chinese representation method.
Though this list is far from complete, it is visible that support for HZ representation has be implemented for major hardware and software platforms.
Two consecutive packages are separated by a blank line.
zwdos (V2.2, March 5, 1993) by Wei Ya
MS DOS kernal extension that gives DOS text mode programs the ability to enter, display, manipulate and print 'zW' and HZ Chinese text.
Supports EGA, VGA or Hercules Monographic displays.
V2.0, Feb. 7, 1995) by Fung F. Lee   Conversion from HZ to GB, GB to HZ, and zW to HZ respectively.
Versions for PC, Mac and Unix exist.
XingXing  (V4.2,  Mar 29. 1995) by Wang Xiangdong
chinese word processor for PC.
(V3.00, Feb. 10, 1994 by Hongbo Ni)
GB Word Processor (Viewer, editor, printing, converter)
Supports EGA/(mono)VGA/SuperVGA monitors, and various printers, Chinese >English dictionary lookup, HanziInfo and glossary; Includes more than 20 Chinese input methods with Intelligent LianXiang and fuzzy Pinyin; Speed up with sentence based Pinyin; Reads and writes GB,Hz,zW & Big5 files; DOS Shell; Configurable.
QuickStar (V3.0, June 7, 1995) by Anthony Mai   Compact size Chinese edit software for PC.
PinYin, CiZu, WuBi, GuoBiao, ASCII etc input method.
Translate to/from GB, HZ and Big5 coded Chinese files.
cnprint (V2.6, Jan. 25, 95) by Yidao Cai   print GB/Hz/BIG5/JIS/KSC/UTF8 etc or convert to PostScript
Both DOS and UNIX version available.
(V2.0, Sept. 1993) by Gongquan Chen)
Chinese GB/HZ printing program for EPSON 24pin printer HXLASER (V2.6, Feb. 1994) by Chen, Gongquan   A GB/HZ/BIG5 file printing program for HP LaserJet plus and later model printers.
V3.0, Jan. 1, 1995) by Jifang Lin   View GB/Hz/Big5 encoded Chinese text file on IBM PC & compatibles ZWLIST
(V1.1,  Nov. 24, 1993) by Gongquan Chen
Chinese HZ/GB/BIG5 File Browser for ZWDOS zwTool (
V1.0, Oct. 30,1993) by Gongquan Chen   a MSDOS TSR program for input of Chinese characters in text mode
; Developed primarily for Chinese programmers using IDE (Integrated Development Environment, like Borland's Turbo languages); Supports GB/HZ;
EGA/VGA required; DateStar (V1.1) by Youzhen Cheng   Chinese Calendar Producer.
Displays Chinese and western calendar in ASCII code,
BIG 5 code, GuoBiao code (PRC Standard), and HZ code (Network)
(V2.21 Dec. 93) by Xiaodong Chen
Display and print GB/HZ or BIG5 coded Chinese text files on Macintosh without Chinese OS system, with easy to use Mac user interface including multiple windows and simple editing features such as delete, copy, cut and paste.
MacHZTerm (V0.52) by Xin Xu
a communication program using CommToolBox, capable of displaying GB, HZ, Big5 texts on line.
HanziTerm (V0.5) by  Ricky Yeung
A terminal emulator for Mac Chinese OS
Support 8 bit character code, HZ, and zW. Tex Edit HZ (
V1.0, Dec. 18 1993) by Tom Bender and Tie Zeng.
A MAC WorldScript savvy Text editor with HZ
MacBlue Telnet (V2.6.6, Feb 16, 1995) by MacBlue   A Telnet program that can handle all Chinese encodings (such as HZ, GB, Big5, ET etc), EUC JIS and EUC KSC; based on NCSA Telnet with built in hanzi input methods.
rnMac (V1.3b5) by Roy Wood   Offline Newsreader including GB  > HZ conversion
Weiqi267 (V2.67) by Xiangbo Kang   record Weiqi games and transfer them through net.
GB, HZ 100 % compatible (but Russian char disabled).
There is a user guide in HZ coding.
Now can also be used for Chinese Chess.
V3.2, Nov. 16, 1994) by Twinbridge Software Corporation
an interface between Windows and applications, it allows Chinese character processing in Windows applications like Word for Windows, Ami Pro, Excel, etc.
You can edit Chinese characters like English characters in most of applications.
WinHZ (V1.1, April 13, 1995) by Tian Bogang   HZ extension for Chinese systems for Windows HZcomm (
V1.5,  Nov. 14, 1993) by Nick Ke Ning.
HZ coding supported communication program under Chinese Windows System (GB internal coded).
HZ coded E mail and news(alt.chinese.text) on line in Windows 3.1 for PCs.
SimpTerm (V0.8.0) by Jianqing Hu
A Chinese communication program for MS Windows 3.1 with build in support for BIG5, HZ and GB encoded text.
ChPad (V1.31) by Tian Bogang   GUO BIAO and HZ file browser for MS WINDOWS 3.1 SilkRoad (V1.0) by Antony C. Hu
GB/HZ Viewer for MS Windows 3.1 gnus chinese (
Tang   convert HZ articles to the code understandable by your terminal automatically in GNUS newsreader (for GNU EMACS).
requires conversion program (e.g. hz2gb and gb2hz) to do the actual conversion.
Tutomu   irc client e lisp program on Mule patched to handle HZ and Big5
now we can read/write all JIS/HZ/Big5 simultaneously on irc hztty
(V2.0 Jan 29, 1994) by Yongguang Zhang
This program turns a tty session from one encoding to another.
For example, running hztty on cxterm can allow you to read/write Chinese in HZ format.
package (V1.534, 1995.03.22) by Jing Shin Chang   a chinese code conversion package for codes widely used in Taiwan and the GB code widely used in Mainland, plus a 7 bit Big5 encoding method (B5Encode3/B5E3, an extension to HZ encoding for GB), including off line converters (CCF/Chinese Code Filters and B5E/B5Encode) and an on line converter (BeTTY) which simulates your native chinese terminal to become aware of the coding systems widely used in Taiwan and GB, HZ encoding.
gb2jis & jis2gb (V1.5, 1995.5.11) by  Koichi Yasuoka   convert GB (or HZ) to/from  JIS with two letter pinyin gb2ps (V2.02) by Wei SUN
convert GB/HZ to postscript, supports simple page formatting (change chinese fonts and font size, cover page, page number, etc).
Five chinese fonts are provided in this release, they are Song, Kai, Fang Song, Hei and FanTi The HZ ENCODING is also supported.
ChiRK (V1.2a) by Bo Yang
GB/HZ/BIG5 text viewer on terminals (or emulations) capable of displaying Tektronics 401x graphics, such as GraphOn,DEC VT240/330, Xterm, Tektool on Sun, EM4105 on PC,
VersaTerm Pro on Mac, etc.
Multi Localization Enhancement of NCSA Mosaic X 2.4 (V2.4.0) by TAKADA, Toshihiro   a patch to make use of various nat'l character sets in NCSA Mosaic for X 2.4.
You can switch between char sets in one Mosaic.
8859 X, KOI 8, GB, HZ, BIG5, KSC & JIS.
