Abstract Operators are looking to introduce services over Segment Routing (SR) Label Switched Paths (LSPs) in networks running Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic Engineering (RSVP TE) LSPs.
In some instances, operators are also migrating existing services from RSVP TE to SR LSPs.
For example, there might be certain services that are well suited for SR and need to coexist with RSVP TE in the same network.
Such introduction or migration of traffic to SR might require coexistence with RSVP TE in the same network for an extended period of time, depending on the operator's intent.
The following document provides solution options for keeping the traffic engineering database consistent across the network, accounting for the different bandwidth utilization between SR and RSVP TE.
Introduction Introduction of SR [RFC8402] in the same network domain as RSVP TE [RFC3209] presents the problem of accounting for SR traffic and making RSVP TE aware of the actual available bandwidth on the network links.
RSVP TE is not aware of how much bandwidth is being consumed by SR services on the network links; hence, both at computation time (for a distributed computation) and at signaling time, RSVP TE LSPs will incorrectly place loads.
This is true where RSVP TE paths are distributed or centrally computed without a common entity managing both SR and RSVP TE computation for the entire network domain.
The problem space can be generalized as a dark bandwidth problem to cases where any other service exists in the network that runs in parallel across common links and whose bandwidth is not reflected in the available and reserved values in the Traffic Engineering Database (TED).
In most practical instances, given the static nature of the traffic demands, limiting the reservable bandwidth available to RSVP  TE has been an acceptable solution.
However, in the case of SR traffic, there is assumed to be very dynamic traffic demands, and there is considerable risk associated with stranding capacity or overbooking service traffic resulting in traffic drops.
The high level requirements to consider are: 1.
Placement of SR LSPs in the same domain as RSVP TE LSPs must not introduce inaccuracies in the TED used by distributed or centralized path computation engines.
Engines that compute RSVP TE paths may have no knowledge of the existence of the SR paths in the same domain.
Engines that compute RSVP TE paths should not require a software upgrade or change to their path computation logic.
Protocol extensions should be avoided or be minimal as, in many cases, this coexistence of RSVP TE and SR may be needed only during a transition phase.
Placement of SR LSPs in the same domain as RSVP TE LSPs that are computed in a distributed fashion must not require migration to a central controller architecture for the RSVP TE LSPs.
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
The following section lists SR and RSVP coexistence solution options.
A specific solution is not recommended as all solutions are valid, even though some may not satisfy all the requirements.
If a solution is acceptable for an operator based on their deployment model, then such a solution can be chosen.
Static Partitioning of Bandwidth In this model, the static reservable bandwidth of an interface can be statically partitioned between SR and RSVP TE; each one can operate within that bandwidth allocation and SHOULD NOT preempt the other.
While it is possible to configure RSVP TE to only reserve up to a certain maximum link bandwidth and manage the remaining link bandwidth for other services, this is a deployment where SR and RSVP  TE are separated in the same network (ships in the night) and can lead to suboptimal link bandwidth utilization not allowing each to consume more, if required and constraining the respective deployments.
The downside of this approach is the inability to use the reservable bandwidth effectively and the inability to use bandwidth left unused by the other protocol.
Centralized Management of Available Capacity
In this model, a central controller performs path placement for both RSVP TE and SR LSPs.
The controller manages and updates its own view of the in use and available capacity.
As the controller is a single common entity managing the network it can have a unified and consistent view of the available capacity at all times.
A practical drawback of this model is that it requires the introduction of a central controller managing the RSVP TE LSPs as a prerequisite to the deployment of any SR LSPs.
Therefore, this approach is not practical for networks where distributed TE with RSVP TE LSPs is already deployed, as it requires a redesign of the network and is not backwards compatible.
This does not satisfy requirement 5.
Note that it is not enough for the controller to just maintain the unified view of the available capacity, it must also perform the path computation for the RSVP TE LSPs, as the reservations for the SR LSPs are not reflected in the TED.
3.3.  Flooding SR Utilization in IGP Using techniques in [RFC7810], [RFC7471], and [RFC7823], the SR utilization information can be flooded in IGP TE, and the RSVP TE path computation engine (Constrained Shortest Path First (CSPF)) can be changed to consider this information.
This requires changes to the RSVP TE path computation logic and would require upgrades in deployments where distributed computation is done across the network.
This does not fit with requirements 3 and 4 mentioned earlier.
3.4.  Running SR over RSVP TE SR can run over dedicated RSVP TE LSPs that carry only SR traffic.
In this model, the LSPs can be one hop or multi hop and can provide bandwidth reservation for the SR traffic based on functionality such as auto bandwidth.
The model of deployment would be similar in nature to running LDP over RSVP TE.
This would allow the TED to stay consistent across the network and any other RSVP TE LSPs will also be aware of the SR traffic reservations.
In this approach, non SR traffic MUST NOT take the SR dedicated RSVP TE LSPs, unless required by policy.
The drawback of this solution is that it requires SR to rely on RSVP  TE for deployment.
Furthermore, the accounting accuracy/frequency of this method is dependent on performance of auto bandwidth for RSVP  TE.
Note that, for this method to work, the SR dedicated RSVP TE LSPs must be set up with the best setup and hold priorities in the network.
TED Consistency by Reflecting SR Traffic
The solution relies on dynamically measuring SR traffic utilization on each TE interface and reducing the bandwidth allowed for use by RSVP TE.
It is assumed that SR traffic receives precedence in terms of the placement on the path over RSVP traffic (that is, RSVP traffic can be preempted from the path in case of insufficient resources).
This is logically equivalent to SR traffic having the best preemption priority in the network.
Note that this does not necessarily mean that SR traffic has higher QoS priority
; in fact, SR and RSVP traffic may be in the same QoS class.
Reducing the bandwidth allowed for use by RSVP TE can be explored using the three parameters available in IGP TE
[RFC3630]), namely Maximum Link Bandwidth, Maximum Reservable Bandwidth, and Unreserved Bandwidth.
Maximum Link Bandwidth: This parameter can be adjusted to accommodate the bandwidth required for SR traffic with cascading impacts on Maximum Reservable Bandwidth and Unreserved Bandwidth.
However, changing the maximum bandwidth for the TE link will prevent any compute engine for SR or RSVP from determining the real static bandwidth of the TE link.
Further, when the Maximum  Reservable Bandwidth is derived from the Maximum Link Bandwidth, its definition changes since Maximum Link Bandwidth will account for the SR traffic.
SR traffic could directly adjust the Unreserved Bandwidth, without impacting Maximum Link Bandwidth or Maximum Reservable Bandwidth.
This model is equivalent to the option described in Section 3.4.
Furthermore this would result in overloading IGP TE advertisements to directly reflect both RSVP TE bandwidth bookings and SR bandwidth measurements.
Maximum Reservable Bandwidth: As the preferred option, SR traffic could adjust the Maximum Reservable Bandwidth, with cascading impact on the Unreserved Bandwidth.
The following methodology can be used at every TE node for this solution, using the following parameters:  T:
Traffic statistics collection time interval.
The number of traffic statistics samples that can provide a smoothing function to the statistics collection.
The value of k is a constant integer multiplier greater or equal to 1.
Traffic averaging calculation (adjustment) interval such that N
Maximum Reservable Bandwidth: The maximum available bandwidth for RSVP TE.
If Diffserv aware MPLS Traffic Engineering (DS TE)
[RFC4124] is enabled, the Maximum Reservable Bandwidth SHOULD be interpreted as the aggregate bandwidth constraint across all Class Types independent of the Bandwidth Constraints model.
The Maximum reservable  bandwidth for TE when no SR traffic or RSVP TE reservations exist on the interface.
RSVP unreserved bandwidth at priority X:
Maximum Reservable  Bandwidth sum of (existing reservations at priority X and all priorities better than X).
The percentage difference of traffic demand that, when exceeded, can result in a change to the RSVP TE Maximum Reservable Bandwidth.
: Specifies the frequency at which IGP TE updates should be triggered based on TE bandwidth updates on a link.
An optional multiplier that can be applied to the SR traffic average.
This multiplier provides the ability to grow or shrink the bandwidth used by SR.
Appendix A offers further guidance on M. At every interval T, each node SHOULD collect the SR traffic statistics for each of its TE interfaces.
The measured SR traffic includes all labeled SR traffic and any traffic entering the SR network over that TE interface.
Further, at every interval N, given a configured SR traffic threshold percentage and a set of collected SR traffic statistics samples across the interval N, the SR traffic average (or any other traffic metric depending on the algorithm used) over this period is calculated.
This method of sampling traffic statistics and adjusting bandwidth reservation accordingly is similar to how bandwidth gets adjusted for auto bandwidth RSVP TE LSPs.
If the difference between the new calculated SR traffic average and the current SR traffic average (that was computed in the prior adjustment) is at least SR traffic threshold percentage, then two values MUST be updated:  New Maximum Reservable Bandwidth   Initial Maximum Reservable  Bandwidth (new SR traffic average   M)
New RSVP unreserved bandwidth at priority
New Maximum  Reservable Bandwidth sum of (existing reservations at priority X and all priorities better than
A DS TE LSR that advertises a Bandwidth Constraints TLV should update the bandwidth constraints for class types based on operator policy.
For example, when Russian Dolls Model (RDM) [RFC4127] is in use, then only BC0 may be updated.
Whereas, when Maximum Allocation Model (MAM) [RFC4125] is in use, then all Bandwidth Constraints (BCs) may be updated equally such that the total value updated is equal to the newly calculated SR traffic average.
Note that the computation of the new RSVP unreserved bandwidth at
priority X MAY result in RSVP TE LSPs being hard or soft preempted.
Such preemption will be based on relative priority (e.g., low to high) between RSVP TE LSPs.
The IGP TE update threshold SHOULD allow for more frequent flooding of unreserved bandwidth.
From an operational point of view, an implementation SHOULD be able to expose both the configured and the actual values of the Maximum Reservable  Bandwidth.
If LSP preemption is not acceptable, then the RSVP TE Maximum  Reservable Bandwidth cannot be reduced below what is currently reserved by RSVP TE on that interface.
This may result in bandwidth not being available for SR traffic.
Thus, it is required that any external controller managing SR LSPs SHOULD be able to detect this situation (for example, by subscribing to TED updates [RFC7752]) and SHOULD take action to reroute existing SR paths.
Generically, SR traffic (or any non RSVP TE traffic) should have its own priority allocated from the available priorities.
This would allow SR to preempt other traffic according to the preemption priority order.
In this solution, the logic to retrieve the statistics, calculating averages and taking action to change the Maximum Reservable Bandwidth is an implementation choice, and all changes are local in nature.
However, note that this is a new network trigger for RSVP TE preemption and thus is a consideration for the operator.
The above solution offers the advantage of not introducing new network wide mechanisms especially during scenarios of migrating to SR in an existing RSVP TE network and reusing existing protocol mechanisms.
This document has no IANA actions.
This document describes solution options for the coexistence of RSVP  TE and SR LSPs in the same administrative domain.
The security considerations for SR are described in [RFC8402].
The security considerations pertaining to RSVP TE are described in [RFC5920].
The security considerations of each architecture are typically unaffected by the presence of the other.
However, when RSVP TE and SR LSPs coexist, it is possible for a hijacked SR traffic stream to maliciously consume sufficient bandwidth and cause disruption to RSVP TE LSPs.
With the solution option specified in Section 3.5, the impact to RSVP TE traffic can be controlled and paths re routed.
Some latent risk of disruption still remains because this solution option relies on taking statistics samples and adopting to new traffic flows only after the adjustment period.
The defensive mechanisms described in the base SR security framework should be employed to guard against situations that result in SR traffic hijacking or denial of service.
Appendix A.  Multiplier Value Range
The following is a suggestion for the range of values for M: M is a per node positive real number that ranges from 0 to 2 with a default of 1 and may be expressed as a percentage.
If M < 1, then the SR traffic average is being understated, which can result in the link getting full even though Maximum  Reservable Bandwidth does not reach zero.
If M > 1, then the SR traffic average is overstated, thereby resulting in the Maximum Reservable Bandwidth reaching zero before the link gets full.
If the reduction of Maximum Reservable  Bandwidth becomes a negative value, then a value of zero SHOULD be used and advertised.
Contributors Chandra Ramachandran Juniper Networks Email: csekar@juniper.net
Raveendra Torvi Juniper Networks Email:
rtorvi@juniper.net Sudharsana Venkataraman Juniper Networks Email:
sudharsana@juniper.net Martin Vigoureux Nokia Email:
