Abstract In this document, we propose an extension to the BGP route selection rules that would avoid unnecessary best path transitions between external paths under certain conditions.
The proposed extension would help the overall network stability, and more importantly, would eliminate certain BGP route oscillations in which more than one external path from one BGP speaker contributes to the churn.
The last two steps of the BGP route selection (Section 9.1.2.2, [BGP]) involve comparing the BGP identifiers and the peering addresses.
The BGP identifier (treated either as an IP address or just an integer [BGP ID]) for a BGP speaker is allocated by the Autonomous System (AS) to which the speaker belongs.
As a result, for a local BGP speaker, the BGP identifier of a route received from an external peer is just a random number.
When routes under consideration are from external peers, the result from the last two steps of the route selection is therefore "random" as far as the local BGP speaker is concerned.
It is based on this observation that we propose an extension to the BGP route selection rules that would avoid unnecessary best path transitions between external paths under certain conditions.
The proposed extension would help the overall network stability, and more importantly, would eliminate certain BGP route oscillations in which more than one external path from one BGP speaker contributes to the churn.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
The Algorithm Consider the case in which the existing best path A is from an external peer, and
another external path B is then selected as the new best path by the route selection algorithm described in [BGP].
When comparing all the paths in route selection, if neither Path A nor Path B is eliminated by the route selection algorithm prior to Step f)
BGP identifier comparison (Section 9.1.2.2, [BGP])
we propose that the existing best path (Path A) be kept as the best path (thus avoiding switching the best path to Path B).
This algorithm SHOULD NOT be applied when either path is from a BGP Confederation peer.
In addition, the algorithm SHOULD NOT be applied when both paths are from peers with an identical BGP identifier (i.e., there exist parallel BGP sessions between two BGP speakers).
As the peering addresses for the parallel sessions are typically allocated by one AS (possibly with route selection considerations), the algorithm (if applied) could impact the existing routing setup.
Furthermore, by not applying the algorithm, the allocation of peering addresses would remain as a simple and effective tool in influencing route selection when parallel BGP sessions exist.
The proposed extension to the BGP route selection rules avoids unnecessary best path transitions between external paths under certain conditions.
Clearly, the extension would help reduce routing and forwarding changes in a network, thus helping the overall network stability.
More importantly, as shown in the following example, the proposed extension can be used to eliminate certain BGP route oscillations in which more than one external path from one BGP speaker contributes to the churn.
, that there are permanent BGP route oscillation scenarios [RFC3345] that the mechanism described in this document does not eliminate.
Consider the example in Figure 1 where R1, R2, R3, and R4 belong to one AS.
R1 is a route reflector with R3 as its client.
R2 is a route reflector with R4 as its client.
The IGP metrics are as listed.
External paths (a), (b), and (c) are as described in Figure 2.
Due to the interaction of the route reflection [BGP RR] and the MULTI EXIT DISC (MED) attribute, the best path on R1 keeps churning between (a) and (c), and the best path on R3 keeps churning between (a) and (b).
With the proposed algorithm, R3 would not switch the best path from (a) to (b) even after R1 withdraws (c) toward its clients, and that is enough to stop the route oscillation.
Although this type of route oscillation can also be eliminated by other route reflection enhancements being developed, the proposed algorithm is extremely simple and can be implemented and deployed immediately without introducing any backward compatibility issues.
The proposed algorithm is backward compatible, and can be deployed on a per BGP speaker basis.
The deployment of the algorithm is highly recommended on a BGP speaker with multiple external BGP peers (especially the ones connecting to an inter exchange point).
Compared to the existing behavior, the proposed algorithm may introduce some "non determinism" in the BGP route selection   although one can argue that the BGP Identifier comparison in the existing route selection has already introduced some "randomness" as described in the introduction section.
Such "non determinism" has not been shown to be detrimental in practice and can be completely eliminated by using the existing mechanisms (such as setting LOCAL PREF or MED) if so desired.
This extension does not introduce any security issues.
Author Information Enke Chen Cisco Systems, Inc. 170 W. Tasman Dr. San Jose,
enkechen@cisco.com Srihari R. Sangli Cisco Systems, Inc. 170 W. Tasman Dr. San Jose,
