Abstract The Message Context header defined in RFC 3458 describes the context of a message (for example: fax message or voice message).
This specification extends the Message Context header with one additional context value: "video message".
A receiving user agent (UA) may use this information as a hint to optimally present the message.
Introduction Email messages can be used to convey many different forms of messages, and the user will interact with different types in different ways.
As explained in RFC 3458 [1], the "message context" of the message conveys information about the way the user expects to interact with the message, such as which icon to display.
then registers the message contexts for a "voice message", "fax  message", "pager message", "multimedia message", "text message", and "none".
Video Message One form of email is a message that consists mostly of a video stream.
Examples of services that send video email are those connected to cell phones that capture video streams, and video email services that use webcams attached to a PC.
These email messages currently consist of two flavors, both of which can be properly considered a video message: 1.
those that embed the video stream internally within the message as a body part, and 2.
those whose video stream is stored on a third party's video server.
However, none of the existing message contexts properly identify such video messages.
This specification extends the Message Context header with one additional context value: video message.
As specified in RFC 3458 [1], this document registers "video message" in the "Internet Message Context Types" repository.
Message Context class name: video message Summary of the message class: Indicates a message whose primary content is a video mail message.
The primary content is video data.
The context is usually a message recorded on a video camera, or a message whose primary purpose is to contain an external reference to a message recorded on a video camera.
Person & email address to contact for further information:
Tony Hansen, tony msgctxt@maillennium.att.com. 4.
This header is intended to be an indicator of message context only.
As such, it is only a hint and requires no behavior on the part of a message user agent.
