Abstract This document defines a master key used between a client of the Protocol for carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA) and an enforcement point, for bootstrapping lower layer ciphering.
The master key is derived from the Master Session Key of the Extensible Authentication Protocol as a result of successful PANA authentication.
The master key guarantees cryptographic independence among enforcement points bootstrapped from PANA authentication across different address families.
Introduction The Protocol for carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA)
[RFC5191] is designed to facilitate network access authentication and authorization of clients in access networks.
It carries Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)
[RFC3748] between a PANA Client (PaC) and a PANA Authentication Agent (PAA) where the PAA functions as an authentication gateway to the Authentication Server (AS).
The PANA framework [RFC5193] defines an another entity referred to as an Enforcement Point (EP), which resides in the access network and allows access (data traffic) of authorized PaCs while preventing access of others depending on the PANA authentication and authorization result (Figure 1).
The EP and PAA may be implemented on the same device or separate devices.
. . v Data traffic Figure 1:
The EP uses non cryptographic or cryptographic filters to selectively allow and discard data packets.
These filters may be applied at the link layer or the IP layer [PANA IPSEC].
When cryptographic access control is used, a secure association protocol [RFC3748] needs to run between the PaC and EP.
After completion of the secure association protocol, link  or network layer per packet security (for example, IPsec ESP) is enabled for integrity protection, data origin authentication, replay protection, and optionally confidentiality protection.
This document defines the PaC EP Master Key (PEMK) that is used by a secure association protocol as the pre shared secret between the PaC and EP to enable cryptographic filters in the access network.
The PEMK is defined to guarantee cryptographic independence among EPs bootstrapped from PANA authentication across different address families.
This document also describes a guideline for distributing PEMKs from the PAA to EP.
This document does not specify a mechanism for a PaC to know whether the lower layer requires a secure association protocol or the pre  shared secret for the secure association protocol needs to be bootstrapped from PANA authentication.
Such a mechanism may be defined by each lower layer protocol.
In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements of the specification.
These words are often capitalized.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
This document reuses the following terms defined in [RFC5191]: PaC (PANA Client), PAA (PANA Authentication Agent), EP (Enforcement Point), MSK (Master Session Key), PANA Session, and Session Identifier.
PaC EP Master Key A PEMK (PaC EP Master Key) is derived from an available MSK.
The PEMK is 64 octets in length and is calculated as follows:
PEMK   prf (MSK, "IETF PEMK"
SID   KID   EPID) where   denotes concatenation.
The prf  function is defined in IKEv2
The pseudo  random function used for the prf
function is specified in the PRF Algorithm AVP carried in a PANA Auth Request message with 'S'
"IETF PEMK" is the ASCII code representation of the non NULL terminated string (excluding the double quotes around it).
SID is a four octet Session Identifier [RFC5191].
KID is the content of the Key ID AVP [RFC5191] associated with the MSK.
EPID is the identifier of the EP.
The first two octets represents the AddressType, which contains an Address Family defined in [IANAADFAM].
The remaining octets encode the address value.
The length of the address value is determined by the AddressType.
The AddressType is used to discriminate the content and format of the remaining octets for the address value.
The use of the combination of address family and address value guarantees the cryptographic independence of PEMKs among multiple EPs that are bootstrapped from PANA authentication across multiple address families.
How a PaC discovers an EPID is out of the scope of this document.
The key name of the PEMK is defined as follows.
SID   KID), where SHA1 denotes the SHA 1 algorithm specified in [SHS].
Inclusion of the EPID, SID, and KID provides uniqueness of PEMK names among multiple PaC EP pairs under a given PAA.
One PEMK is used between one PaC and one EP.
A PEMK MUST NOT be shared among multiple PaCs or EPs.
A PEMK is used as the pre shared key of the secure association protocol in the scope of the PEMK.
A PEMK MUST NOT be used for any other usage.
The lifetime of a PEMK MUST be less than or equal to the lifetime of the MSK from which it is derived.
At the end of the lifetime, the PEMK and its associated states MUST be deleted.
The following considerations are specifically made to follow the Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA)
Other AAA key management requirements such as key lifetime, key scope, key context, and key name are described in Section 3.
Since the device identifier of the EP is involved in the key derivation function, Channel Binding on a PEMK is made between the PaC and PAA at the time when the PEMK is generated.
If a malicious EP advertises a different device identifier than that registered with the PAA, the malicious attempt will not succeed since the secure association protocol will fail due to the difference in the PEMK values calculated by the PaC and the EP.
Guideline for Distributing PEMK from PAA to EP When an EP is implemented on the same device as the PAA, no protocol needs to be used for distributing a PEMK from the PAA to the EP.
In the case where the EP is implemented on a separate device from the PAA, a protocol is needed to distribute a PEMK from the PAA to the EP.
Such a key distribution protocol may depend on the architecture and deployment using PANA.
A key distribution protocol for a PEMK MUST ensure that the PEMK is encrypted as well as integrity and replay protected, with a security association between the PAA and EP, where the security association MUST be cryptographically bound to the identities of the PAA and EP known to the PaC.
