Abstract This document describes the registration of the Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) sub type application/font tdpfr.
The encoding is defined by the PFR Specification.
A Portable Font Resource (PFR) contains a set of glyph shapes.
Each glyph shape is associated with a character code.
The PFR format is designed to be both compact and platform independent.
It is intended to facilitate accurate rendering of fonts in all environments whether or not they have the required fonts already installed.
Conventions used in this document The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [REQ].
This document describes the registration of the MIME sub type application/font tdpfr.
The encoding is defined by [PFR].
PFR Definition PFR (Portable Font Resource) is defined by Bitstream Inc. in [PFR].
The documentation can be obtained from Bitstream at: Bitstream Inc. 215 First Street Cambridge MA 02142
A copy of this specification can also be found at:
While a brief scope and feature description is provided in this section as background information, the reader is directed to the original PFR specification [PFR] to obtain complete feature and technical details.
A PFR contains a set of glyph shapes.
Each glyph shape is associated with a character code.
The PFR format is designed to be both compact and platform independent.
It is intended to facilitate accurate rendering of fonts in environments whether or not they have the required fonts already installed.
The glyph shape definitions in a PFR are resolution independent.
This allows glyph definitions to be displayed or printed on devices with a wide variety of resolutions.
It also allows glyphs to be rendered at any size.
Some of the features of the PFR format are: Compact representation of glyph shapes Independent of byte order and operating system
Independent of output device resolution Fully scalable to any glyph size Optional inclusion of bitmap glyph images Adopted as the font standard by DAVIC, DVB, and DTG 4.
This document is submitted by J. Collins,
Bitstream Inc.  All comments should be directed to <jcollins@bitstream.com>.
The PFR media type has been previously registered with IANA as application/
In view of its subsequent widespread adoption as a standard font format by multiple standards bodies who have relationships with the Internet community, Bitstream has been asked to re register this media type within the IETF tree.
Registration of Standard MIME Media type application/font tdpfr MIME media type name: application MIME subtype name:
font tdpfr Required parameters: none Optional parameters: none Encoding considerations: Binary or base 64 required Security considerations
: PFR uses a structure that can store glyph image data and encoding arrays.
The fields defined in the PFR specification are of a descriptive nature and provide information that is useful to facilitate viewing and rendering of glyph images by a recipient.
As such, the fields currently defined in the PFR specification do not in themselves create additional security risks, since the fields are not used to induce any particular behavior by the recipient application.
PFR has an extensible structure, so that it is theoretically possible that fields could be defined in the future which could be used to induce particular actions on the part of the recipient, thus presenting additional security risks, but this type of capability is not supported in the referenced PFR specification.
Indeed, the definition of fields that would include such processing instructions is inconsistent with the goals and spirit of the PFR specification.
Interoperability considerations: none Published specification:
The specification for this content type is available on request from: Bitstream Inc. 215 First Street Cambridge MA 02142
A copy of this specification can also be found at: http://www.bitstream.com/pfrspec/index.html Applications which use this media type:
Netscape Communicator, Bitstream WebFont Maker,
50 46 52 30 hex File extension(s):
PFR Macintosh File Type Code(s)
' Type: 'PFR ' Person to contact for further information: "John Collins" <jcollins@bitstream.com
Intended usage: common Author/Change controller: "John Collins"
