Abstract A transit only network is defined as a network connecting routers only.
In OSPF, transit only networks are usually configured with routable IP addresses, which are advertised in Link State Advertisements (LSAs) but are not needed for data traffic.
In addition, remote attacks can be launched against routers by sending packets to these transit only networks.
This document presents a mechanism to hide transit only networks to speed up network convergence and reduce vulnerability to remote attacks.
In the context of this document, 'hiding' implies that the prefixes are not installed in the routing tables on OSPF routers.
In some cases, IP addresses may still be visible when using OSPFv2.
This document updates RFCs 2328 and 5340.
A transit only network is defined as a network connecting routers only.
In OSPF, transit only networks are usually configured with routable IP addresses, which are advertised in LSAs but not needed for data traffic.
In addition, remote attacks can be launched against routers by sending packets to these transit only networks.
This document presents a mechanism to hide transit only networks to speed up network convergence and reduce vulnerability to remote attacks.
Hiding transit only networks will not impact reachability to the end hosts.
In the context of this document, 'hiding' implies that the prefixes are not installed in the routing tables on OSPF routers.
In [OSPFv2], the IPv4 interface addresses are still visible in the Router LSA links and the network LSA Link State ID (LSID).
In [OSPFv3], the router LSAs and network LSAs do not contain IPv6 addresses and are not visible.
This document updates [OSPFv2] and [OSPFv3] by specifying a mechanism that can be used to hide transit only networks.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [KEYWORD].
Hiding IPv4 Transit Only Networks in OSPFv2
In [OSPFv2], networks are classified as point to point, broadcast, or non broadcast.
In the following sections, we will review how these OSPF networks are being advertised and discuss how to hide them.
A point to point network joins a single pair of routers.
Figure 1 shows a point to point network connecting routers RT1 and RT2.
Physical Point to Point Network 2.1.1.
Advertising Point to Point Networks
For each numbered point to point network, a router has two link descriptions in its router LSA: one Type 1 link (point to point) describing the neighboring router, and one Type 3 link (stub) describing the assigned IPv4 subnet.
RT1's Router ID Advertising Router
The Type 1 link will be used for SPF calculation, while the Type 3 link will be used to install a route to the corresponding subnet in the Routing Information Base (RIB).
Hiding Point to Point Networks
To hide a transit only point to point network, the Type 3 link is omitted from the router LSA.
RT1's Router ID Advertising Router
A broadcast network joins many (more than two) routers and supports the capability to address a single physical message to all of the attached routers.
Figure 2 shows a broadcast network connecting routers RT3, RT4, and RT5.
A Designated Router (DR) describes a broadcast network in a network LSA.
;RT3's Router ID Network Mask
In addition, the Link State ID is also being used for the two way connectivity check.
Sending Network LSA A special subnet mask value of 255.255.255.255 MUST be used in the network LSA to hide a transit only broadcast network.
While a broadcast network connects more than routers, using 255.255.255.255 will not hide an access broadcast network accidentally.
As there is no change of the Link State ID, the two way connectivity check would proceed normally.
RT3's Router ID Network Mask
;special subnet mask Attached Router
It is RECOMMENDED that all routers in an area be upgraded at the same time to process the modified network LSA correctly and consistently.
When a router receives a network LSA, it MUST calculate the routing table normally [OSPFv2].
However, if the network mask in the network LSA is 255.255.255.255, the router MUST NOT install the route in the RIB.
When a router that has not yet been upgraded receives a modified network LSA, as specified in Section 2.2.2.1, a host route to the originating DR will be installed.
This is not ideal, but it is better than the current result, which exposes the whole subnet.
In a partial deployment scenario, upgraded routers and routers that have not yet been upgraded may coexist.
The former do not install the host route to the DR's interface, while the latter install it.
Such inconsistencies create routing black holes, which should normally be avoided.
In this case, however, as packets destined for the transit only networks are dropped somewhere in the network, the black holes actually help the DRs defend themselves from remote attacks.
In summary, the modification of the network LSA, as specified in Section 2.2.2.1, is backward compatible with the current specification of [OSPFv2], even in a partial deployment scenario.
A non broadcast network joins many (more than two) routers but does NOT support the capability to address a single physical message to all of the attached routers.
As mentioned in [OSPFv2], OSPF runs in one of two modes over non broadcast networks:
Non Broadcast Multi  Access (NBMA) or point to multipoint.
In NBMA mode, OSPF emulates operation over a broadcast network: a Designated Router is elected for the NBMA network, and the Designated Router originates an LSA for the network.
To hide an NBMA transit only network, OSPF adopts the same modification as that used over the broadcast transit only network (see Section 2.2.2).
In point to multipoint mode, OSPF treats the non broadcast network as a collection of point to point links.
Figure 3 shows a non broadcast network connecting routers RT6, RT7, RT8, and RT9.
In this network, all routers can communicate directly, except for routers RT7 and RT8.
Advertising Point to Multipoint Networks
For a point to multipoint network, a router has multiple link descriptions in its router LSA, one Type 1 link (point to point) for EACH directly communicable router, and one Type 3 link (stub) advertising its interface IPv4 address with a subnet mask of 255.255.255.255.
router LSA Link State ID
RT7's Router ID Advertising Router
Interface IP address Link Data
Hiding Point to Multipoint Networks
To hide a transit only point to multipoint network, the Type 3 link is omitted from the router LSA.
router LSA Link State ID
RT7's Router ID Advertising Router
Hiding IPv6 Transit Only Networks in OSPFv3
In [OSPFv3], addressing semantics have been removed from the OSPF protocol packets and the main LSA types, leaving a network protocol  independent core.
More specifically, router LSAs and network LSAs no longer contain network addresses but simply express topology information.
Instead, two new LSA types, link LSA and intra area prefix LSA, have been introduced.
A link LSA associates a list of IPv6 addresses to a link and has local link flooding scope, and an intra area prefix LSA
either associates a list of IPv6 addresses with a router by referencing a router LSA or associates a list of IPv6 addresses with a broadcast/NBMA network by referencing a network LSA.
In the latter case, the prefixes in the link LSAs from adjacent neighbors are copied into the intra area prefix LSA by the Designated Router.
To hide a transit only network in [OSPFv3], the IPv6 address prefixes are omitted from the router LSA.
Consequently, when a Designated Router builds an intra area prefix LSA referencing a network LSA, these IPv6 address prefixes will be omitted.
In addition, when a router builds an intra area prefix LSA that is referencing a router LSA, the associated IPv6 address prefixes from the transit
only network MUST also be omitted from the intra area
Hiding AF Enabled Transit Only Networks in OSPFv3
[OSPF AF] supports multiple Address Families (AFs) by mapping each AF to a separate Instance ID and OSPFv3 instance.
In the meantime, each prefix advertised in OSPFv3 has a prefix length field [OSPFv3], which facilitates advertising prefixes of different lengths in different AFs.
The existing LSAs defined in [OSPFv3] are used for prefix advertising, and there is no need to define new LSAs.
In other words, as link LSAs and intra area prefix LSAs are still being used, the same mechanism explained in Section 3 can be used to hide those AF enabled transit only networks as well.
By eliminating the ability to reach transit only networks, the ability to manage these interfaces may be reduced.
In order not to reduce the functionality and capability of the overall network, it is recommended that extensions such as [UNNUMBERED] also be implemented.
Note that the extension defined in [UNNUMBERED] may provide the user with the IP address of an interface.
If that address was hidden, as specified in this document, then even though the address is assigned to the interface, it will not be reachable.
A non zero forwarding address can be advertised in AS external LSAs and Not So Stubby Area LSAs (NSSA LSAs)
[NSSA] to achieve optimal routing to Autonomous System (AS) external routes.
The matching routing table entry for the forwarding address must exist to facilitate the SPF calculation.
In other words, when prefix hiding is configured on the next hop interface, the next hop address MUST NOT be advertised as a forwarding address.
Consequently, sub optimal routing to these AS external routes may exist when prefix hiding is configured.
Virtual Links Virtual links are used to connect physically separate components of the backbone.
The virtual link's viability is determined by the existence of an intra area path between two endpoints.
The matching routing table entries of the endpoints must exist to ensure the virtual link's operation.
In other words, if prefix hiding is configured on an interface, the virtual link endpoint MUST NOT use that interface's IP address as the virtual interface's IP address.
Unnumbered Interfaces Note that no host route is generated for, and
no IP packets can be addressed to, interfaces to unnumbered point to point networks [OSPFv2].
In other words, these addresses are already hidden.
However, for manageability purposes, it may be common practice to manually include the numbered interface (for example, a loopback interface to which the unnumbered interface points) in routing updates.
If needed, the numbered interface's address can be hidden by using the mechanisms described in this document or by simply not advertising it.
Before deciding to hide (or suppress the advertisement of) a numbered interface, it is very important to consider other uses that interface may have.
Examples of common uses may include virtual link endpoint, inter domain routing peering point, etc.
In other words, it may not be possible to hide the address associated to an unnumbered interface due to other applications in the network.
One motivation for this document is to reduce vulnerability to remote attacks by hiding transit only networks.
The result should then be that fewer OSPF core networks will be exposed.
The mechanisms described above result in reachability information from transit only networks not being installed in the routers' forwarding tables.
The effect is that even if the address of a transit only network is known, the forwarding information is not present in the routers to reach the destination.
Also, in some cases, the address information is completely omitted from the LSA.
Some information in the LSA (such as the OSPF Router ID) cannot be omitted.
Even though the Router ID may be taken from an IPv4 address on the router, the configuration can be easily changed.
Note again that having an address doesn't guarantee reachability if the information is hidden from the forwarding tables.
While the steps described in this document are meant to be applied only to transit only networks, they could be used to hide other networks as well.
It is expected that the same care that users put into the configuration of other routing protocol parameters is used in the configuration of this extension.
