Abstract This document defines a way for an Intermediate System to Intermediate System
(IS IS) router to advertise multiple types of supported Maximum SID Depths (MSDs) at node and/or link granularity.
Such advertisements allow entities (e.g., centralized controllers) to determine whether a particular Segment ID (SID) stack can be supported in a given network.
This document only defines one type of MSD: Base MPLS Imposition.
However, it defines an encoding that can support other MSD types.
This document focuses on MSD use in a network that is Segment Routing (SR) enabled, but MSD may also be useful when SR is not enabled.
1.  Introduction When Segment Routing (SR) paths are computed by a centralized controller, it is critical that the controller learn the Maximum SID Depth (MSD) that can be imposed at each node/link of a given SR path.
This ensures that the Segment Identifier (SID) stack depth of a computed path does not exceed the number of SIDs the node is capable of imposing.
[PCEP EXT] defines how to signal MSD in the Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP).
However, if PCEP is not supported/ configured on the head end of an SR tunnel or a Binding SID anchor node, and the controller does not participate in IGP routing
, it has no way of learning the MSD of nodes and links.
BGP LS (Distribution of Link State and TE Information Using Border Gateway Protocol)
[RFC7752] defines a way to expose topology and associated attributes and capabilities of the nodes in that topology to a centralized controller.
MSD signaling by BGP LS has been defined in [MSD BGP].
Typically, BGP LS is configured on a small number of nodes that do not necessarily act as head ends.
In order for BGP LS to signal MSD for all the nodes and links in the network for which MSD is relevant, MSD capabilities SHOULD be advertised by every Intermediate System to Intermediate System
(IS IS) router in the network.
Other types of MSDs are known to be useful.
For example, [ELC ISIS] defines Entropy Readable Label Depth (ERLD), which is used by a head  end to insert an Entropy Label (EL) at a depth where it can be read by transit nodes.
This document defines an extension to IS IS used to advertise one or more types of MSDs at node and/or link granularity.
It also creates an IANA registry for assigning MSD Type identifiers and defines the Base MPLS Imposition MSD Type.
In the future, it is expected that new MSD Types will be defined to signal additional capabilities, e.g., entropy labels, SIDs that can be imposed through recirculation, or SIDs associated with another data plane such as IPv6.
MSD advertisements MAY be useful even if Segment Routing itself is not enabled.
For example, in a non SR MPLS network, MSD defines the maximum label depth.
MPLS Imposition is the number of MPLS labels that can be imposed inclusive of all service/transport/special labels.
Maximum SID Depth is the number of SIDs supported by a node or a link on a node.
Segment Identifier is defined in [RFC8402].
Imposition is the act of modifying and/or adding labels to the outgoing label stack associated with a packet.
The number of labels imposed is then the sum of the number of labels that are replaced and the number of labels that are pushed.
See [RFC3031] for further details.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
TLV is defined within the body of the IS
IS Router CAPABILITY TLV [RFC7981] to carry the provisioned SID depth of the router originating the IS
Node MSD is the smallest MSD supported by the node on the set of interfaces configured for use by the advertising IGP instance.
MSD values may be learned via a hardware API or may be provisioned. 0
Node MSD Sub TLV Type: 23 Length: variable (multiple of 2 octets); represents the total length of the Value field Value:
field consists of one or more pairs of a 1 octet MSD Type and 1 octet
MSD Value MSD Type: value defined in the "IGP MSD Types" registry created by the IANA Considerations section of this document Section 6 MSD Value: number in the range of 0 255
(for all MSD Types, 0 represents the lack of ability to support a SID stack of any depth; any other value represents that of the node.
This value MUST represent the lowest value supported by any link configured for use by the advertising IS IS instance.)
This sub TLV is optional.
The scope of the advertisement is specific to the deployment.
If there exist multiple Node MSD advertisements for the same MSD Type originated by the same router, the procedures defined in [RFC7981] apply.
These procedures may result in different MSD values being used, for example, by different controllers.
This does not, however, create any interoperability issue.
TLV is defined for TLVs 22, 23, 25, 141, 222, and 223 to carry the MSD of the interface associated with the link.
MSD values may be signaled by the forwarding plane or may be provisioned.
Link MSD Sub TLV Type: 15 Length: variable (multiple of 2 octets); represents the total length of the Value field Value:
field consists of one or more pairs of a 1 octet MSD Type and 1 octet
MSD Value MSD Type: value defined in the "IGP MSD Types" registry created by the IANA Considerations section of this document Section 6 MSD Value: number in the range of 0 255
(for all MSD Types, 0 represents the lack of ability to support a SID stack of any depth; any other value represents that of the particular link when used as an outgoing interface.)
This sub TLV is optional.
If multiple Link MSD advertisements for the same MSD Type and the same link are received, the procedure to select which copy to use is undefined.
If the advertising router performs label imposition in the context of the ingress interface, it is not possible to meaningfully advertise per link values.
In such a case, only the Node MSD SHOULD be advertised.
Procedures for Defining and Using Node and Link
When Link MSD is present for a given MSD Type, the value of the Link MSD MUST take precedence over the Node MSD.
If a Link MSD Type is not signaled, but the Node MSD Type is, then the Node MSD Type value MUST be considered to be the MSD value for that link.
In order to increase flooding efficiency, it is RECOMMENDED that routers with homogenous Link MSD values advertise just the Node MSD value.
The meaning of the absence of both Node and Link MSD advertisements for a given MSD Type is specific to the MSD Type.
Generally, it can only be inferred that the advertising node does not support advertisement of that MSD Type.
In some cases, however, the lack of advertisement might imply that the functionality associated with the MSD Type is not supported.
The correct interpretation MUST be specified when an MSD Type is defined.
Base MPLS Imposition MSD Base MPLS
Imposition MSD (BMI MSD) signals the total number of MPLS labels that can be imposed, including all service/transport/special labels.
The absence of BMI MSD advertisements indicates only that the advertising node does not support advertisement of this capability.
IANA Considerations IANA has allocated a sub TLV type for the new sub TLV proposed in Section 2 of this document from the "Sub TLVs for TLV 242
(IS IS Router CAPABILITY TLV)
" registry as defined by [RFC7981].
: Node MSD IANA has allocated a sub TLV type as defined in Section 3 from the "Sub TLVs for TLVs 22, 23, 25, 141, 222, and 223 (Extended IS reachability, IS Neighbor Attribute, L2 Bundle Member Attributes, inter AS reachability information, MT ISN, and MT IS Neighbor Attribute TLVs)
: Link MSD Per TLV information where Link MSD sub TLV can be part of:
Where LINK MSD Sub TLV Can Be Present IANA has created an IANA managed registry titled "IGP MSD Types" under the "Interior Gateway Protocol (IGP) Parameters" registry to identify MSD Types as proposed in Sections 2 and 3.
The registration procedure is "Expert Review" as defined in [RFC8126].
Types are an unsigned 8 bit number.
The following values are defined by this document:
MSD Types Codepoints Registry General guidance for the designated experts is defined in [RFC7370].
Security Considerations Security considerations as specified by [RFC7981] are applicable to this document.
The advertisement of an incorrect MSD value may have negative consequences.
If the value is smaller than supported, path computation may fail to compute a viable path.
If the value is larger than supported, an attempt to instantiate a path that can't be supported by the head end (the node performing the SID imposition) may occur.
The presence of this information may also inform an attacker of how to induce any of the aforementioned conditions.
The following people contributed to this document:
