Abstract Currently BGP 4 [BGP 4] is capable of carrying routing information only for IPv4 [IPv4].
The extensions are backward compatible a router that supports the extensions can interoperate with a router that doesn't support the extensions.
This document obsoletes RFC 2283.
The only three pieces of information carried by BGP 4 that are IPv4 specific are (a)
the NEXT HOP attribute (expressed as an IPv4 address), (b) AGGREGATOR (contains an IPv4 address), and (c)
NLRI (expressed as IPv4 address prefixes).
This document assumes that any BGP speaker (including the one that supports multiprotocol capabilities defined in this document) has to have an IPv4 address (which will be used, among other things, in the AGGREGATOR attribute).
Therefore, to enable BGP 4 to support routing for multiple Network Layer protocols
the only two things that have to be added to BGP 4 are (a) the ability to associate a particular Network Layer protocol with the next hop information, and (b) the ability to associated a particular Network Layer protocol with NLRI.
To identify individual Network Layer protocols this document uses Address Family, as defined in [RFC1700].
One could further observe that the next hop information (the information provided by the NEXT HOP attribute) is meaningful (and necessary) only in conjunction with the advertisements of reachable destinations in conjunction with the advertisements of unreachable destinations (withdrawing routes from service)
the next hop information is meaningless.
This suggests that the advertisement of reachable destinations should be grouped with the advertisement of the next hop to be used for these destinations, and that the advertisement of reachable destinations should be segregated from the advertisement of unreachable destinations.
To provide backward compatibility, as well as to simplify introduction of the multiprotocol capabilities into BGP 4 this document uses two new attributes, Multiprotocol Reachable NLRI
(MP REACH NLRI), and Multiprotocol Unreachable NLRI
The first one (MP REACH NLRI) is used to carry the set of reachable destinations together with the next hop information to be used for forwarding to these destinations.
The second one (MP UNREACH NLRI) is used to carry the set of unreachable destinations.
Both of these attributes are optional and non  transitive.
This way a BGP speaker that doesn't support the multiprotocol capabilities will just ignore the information carried in these attributes, and will not pass it to other BGP speakers.
Multiprotocol Reachable NLRI MP REACH NLRI
: This is an optional non transitive attribute that can be used for the following purposes: (a) to advertise a feasible route to a peer (b) to permit a router to advertise the Network Layer address of the router that should be used as the next hop to the destinations listed in the Network Layer Reachability Information field of the MP NLRI attribute.
(c) to allow a given router to report some or all of the Subnetwork Points of Attachment (SNPAs) that exist within the local system
Length of Next Hop Network Address (1 octet)
Network Address of Next Hop (variable)
Number of SNPAs (1 octet)
Length of first SNPA(1 octet)
The use and meaning of these fields are as follows:
Address Family Identifier: This field carries the identity of the Network Layer protocol associated with the Network Address that follows.
Presently defined values for this field are specified in RFC 1700 (see the Address Family Numbers section).
Subsequent Address Family Identifier: This field provides additional information about the type of the Network Layer Reachability Information carried in the attribute.
Length of Next Hop Network Address: A 1 octet field whose value expresses the length of the "Network Address of Next Hop" field as measured in octets Network Address of Next Hop:
A variable length field that contains the Network Address of the next router on the path to the destination system Number of SNPAs:
A 1 octet field which contains the number of distinct SNPAs to be listed in the following fields.
The value 0 may be used to indicate that no SNPAs are listed in this attribute.
A 1 octet field whose value expresses the length of the "Nth SNPA of Next Hop" field as measured in semi octets Nth SNPA of Next Hop: A variable length field that contains an SNPA of the router whose Network Address is contained in the "Network Address of Next Hop" field.
The field length is an integral number of octets in length, namely the rounded up integer value of one half the SNPA length expressed in semi octets; if the SNPA contains an odd number of semi octets, a value in this field will be padded with a trailing all zero semi octet.
Network Layer Reachability Information: A variable length field that lists NLRI for the feasible routes that are being advertised in this attribute.
When the Subsequent Address Family Identifier field is set to one of the values defined in this document, each NLRI is encoded as specified in the "NLRI encoding" section of this document.
The next hop information carried in the MP REACH NLRI path attribute defines the Network Layer address of the border router that should be used as the next hop to the destinations listed in the MP NLRI attribute in the UPDATE message.
When advertising a MP REACH NLRI attribute to an external peer, a router may use one of its own interface addresses in the next hop component of the attribute, provided the external peer to which the route is being advertised shares a common subnet with the next hop address.
This is known as a "first party" next hop.
A BGP speaker can advertise to an external peer an interface of any internal peer router in the next hop component, provided the external peer to which the route is being advertised shares a common subnet with the next hop address.
This is known as a "third party" next hop information.
A BGP speaker can advertise any external peer router in the next hop component, provided that the Network Layer address of this border router was learned from an external peer, and the external peer to which the route is being advertised shares a common subnet with the next hop address.
This is a second form of "third party" next hop information.
Normally the next hop information is chosen such that the shortest available path will be taken.
A BGP speaker must be able to support disabling advertisement of third party next hop information to handle imperfectly bridged media or for reasons of policy.
A BGP speaker must never advertise an address of a peer to that peer as a next hop, for a route that the speaker is originating.
A BGP speaker must never install a route with itself as the next hop.
When a BGP speaker advertises the route to an internal peer, the advertising speaker should not modify the next hop information associated with the route.
When a BGP speaker receives the route via an internal link, it may forward packets to the next hop address if the address contained in the attribute is on a common subnet with the local and remote BGP speakers.
An UPDATE message that carries the MP REACH NLRI must also carry the ORIGIN and the AS PATH attributes (both in EBGP and in IBGP exchanges).
Moreover, in IBGP exchanges such a message must also carry the LOCAL PREF attribute.
If such a message is received from an external peer, the local system shall check whether the leftmost AS in the AS PATH attribute is equal to the autonomous system number of the peer than sent the message.
If that is not the case, the local system shall send the NOTIFICATION message with Error Code UPDATE Message Error, and the Error Subcode set to Malformed AS PATH.
An UPDATE message that carries no NLRI, other than the one encoded in the MP REACH NLRI attribute, should not carry the NEXT HOP attribute.
If such a message contains the NEXT HOP attribute, the BGP speaker that receives the message should ignore this attribute.
Multiprotocol Unreachable NLRI MP UNREACH NLRI
: This is an optional non transitive attribute that can be used for the purpose of withdrawing multiple unfeasible routes from service.
The use and the meaning of these fields are as follows:
Address Family Identifier: This field carries the identity of the Network Layer protocol associated with the NLRI that follows.
Presently defined values for this field are specified in RFC 1700 (see the Address Family Numbers section).
Subsequent Address Family Identifier: This field provides additional information about the type of the Network Layer Reachability Information carried in the attribute.
Withdrawn Routes: A variable length field that lists NLRI for the routes that are being withdrawn from service.
When the Subsequent Address Family Identifier field is set to one of the values defined in this document, each NLRI is encoded as specified in the "NLRI encoding" section of this document.
An UPDATE message that contains the MP UNREACH NLRI is not required to carry any other path attributes.
The use and the meaning of these fields are as follows:
The Length field indicates the length in bits of the address prefix.
A length of zero indicates a prefix that matches all (as specified by the address family) addresses (with prefix, itself, of zero octets).
The Prefix field contains an address prefix followed by enough trailing bits to make the end of the field fall on an octet boundary.
Note that the value of trailing bits is irrelevant.
This document defines the following values for the Subsequent Address Family Identifier field carried in the MP REACH NLRI and MP UNREACH NLRI attributes:
1 Network Layer Reachability Information used for unicast forwarding 2 Network Layer Reachability Information used for multicast forwarding 3 Network Layer Reachability Information used for both unicast and multicast forwarding 6.
If a BGP speaker receives from a neighbor an Update message that contains the MP REACH NLRI or MP UNREACH NLRI attribute, and the speaker determines that the attribute is incorrect, the speaker must delete all the BGP routes received from that neighbor whose AFI/SAFI is the same as the one carried in the incorrect MP REACH NLRI or MP UNREACH NLRI attribute.
For the duration of the BGP session over which the Update message was received, the speaker then should ignore all the subsequent routes with that AFI/SAFI received over that session.
In addition, the speaker may terminate the BGP session over which the Update message was received.
The session should be terminated with the Notification message code/subcode indicating "Update Message Error"/"Optional Attribute Error".
Use of BGP Capability Advertisement A BGP speaker that uses Multiprotocol Extensions should use the Capability Advertisement procedures [BGP CAP] to determine whether the speaker could use Multiprotocol Extensions with a particular peer.
The fields in the Capabilities Optional Parameter are set as follows.
The Capability Code field is set to 1 (which indicates Multiprotocol Extensions capabilities).
The Capability Length field is set to 4.
The Capability Value field is defined as: The use and meaning of this field is as follow:
Should be set to 0 by the sender and ignored by the receiver.
SAFI Subsequent Address Family Identifier (8 bit), encoded the same way as in the Multiprotocol Extensions.
A speaker that supports multiple <AFI, SAFI> tuples includes them as multiple Capabilities in the Capabilities Optional Parameter.
To have a bi directional exchange of routing information for a particular <AFI, SAFI> between a pair of BGP speakers, each such speaker must advertise to the other (via the Capability Advertisement mechanism) the capability to support that particular <AFI, SAFI> routes.
As specified in this document, the MPL REACH NLRI and MP UNREACH NLRI attributes contain the Subsequence Address Family Identifier (SAFI) field.
The SAFI name space is defined in Section 9.
The IANA will maintain and register values for the SAFI namespace as follows.
SAFI value 0 is reserved.
SAFI values 1, 2, and 3 are assigned in this document.
SAFI values 4 through 63 are to be assigned by IANA using the "IETF Consensus" policy defined in RFC 2434.
SAFI values 64 through 127 are to be assigned by IANA, using the "First Come First Served" policy defined in RFC 2434.
SAFI values 128 through 255 are for "private use", and values in this range are not to be assigned by IANA.
This document clarifies handling of an UPDATE message that carries no NLRI, other than the one encoded in the MP REACH NLRI attribute.
This document clarifies error handling in the presence of MP REACH NLRI or MP UNREACH NLRI attributes.
This document specifies the use of BGP Capabilities Advertisements in conjunction with Multi protocol extensions.
Finally, this document includes the "IANA Consideration" Section.
This extension to BGP does not change the underlying security issues inherent in the existing BGP [Heffernan].
