Abstract This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) 'ieee' for Uniform Resource Names (URNs) used to identify resources published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).
IEEE specifies and manages resources that utilize this URN identification model.
Management activities for these and other resources types are handled by the manager of the IEEE Registration Authority.
The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) is an organization whose objectives include the educational and technical advancement of electrical and electronic engineering, telecommunications, computer engineering, and allied disciplines.
Within IEEE, standardization activities are organized into sponsors, such as the LAN/MAN Standards Committee, and then working groups such as 802.1 and 802.3.
As part of these specification efforts, there is a need to maintain identifiers in a managed namespace that is unique and persistent.
To ensure that this namespace's uniqueness is absolute, a registration of a specific URN Syntax [RFC2141] Namespace Identifier (NID) for use by IEEE is specified in this document, in full conformance with the NID registration process specified in URN Namespace Definition Mechanisms [RFC3406].
URN Specification for IEEE Namespace ID: ieee Registration information: registration version number: 1 registration date: 2016 12 05
Declared registrant of the namespace:
Registering organization: Name: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Address: 445 Hoes Lane Piscataway, NJ 08854
Angela Thomas Role: Manager, IEEE Registration Authority Email: ieee registration authority@ieee.org Declaration of syntactic structure:
The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the IEEE NID will have the following structure:
urn:ieee:{IEEEresource}:{ResourceSpecificString} where "IEEEresource" is a US ASCII string that conforms to the URN syntax requirements [RFC2141] and defines a specific class of resource type.
Each resource type has a specific labeling scheme that is covered by "ResourceSpecificString", which also conforms to the naming requirements [RFC2141].
IEEE maintains a registration authority, the IEEE Registration Authority (IEEE RA), that will manage the assignment of "IEEEresource" and the specific registration values assigned for each resource class.
The IEEE Registration Authority (IEEE RA) provides information on the registered resources and the registrations for each.
More information about this registry and the procedures to be followed are available at: http://standards.ieee.org/develop/regauth/tut/ieeeurn.pdf Identifier uniqueness considerations: The IEEE RA will manage resources using the IEEE NID and will be the authority for managing the resources and subsequent associated strings.
In the associated procedures, the IEEE RA will ensure the uniqueness of the strings themselves or will permit secondary responsibility for management of well defined sub trees.
Identifier persistence considerations: IEEE will update documentation of the registered uses of the IEEE NID as needed.
This will be structured such that each "IEEEresource" will have a separate description and registration table.
The registration tables and information are published and maintained by the IEEE RA on its web site.
Process of identifier assignment: IEEE RA will provide procedures for registration of each type of resource that it maintains.
Process for identifier resolution: The namespace is not listed with an RDS; this is not relevant.
The strings used as values for "IEEEresource" and "ResourceSpecificString" are case insensitive.
Conformance with URN Syntax: No special considerations.
URN assignment will be handled by procedures implemented in support of IEEE activities.
The following examples are representative URNs that could be assigned by the IEEE RA.
While support for YANG [RFC6020]
[RFC7950] was a catalyst for the creation of the namespace, the following are not necessarily the strings that would be assigned.
There are no additional security considerations other than those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general, which are described in Functional Requirements for URNs [RFC1737], URN Syntax [RFC2141], and URN Namespace Definition Mechanisms [RFC3406].
This document adds "ieee" to the "Formal URN Namespaces" registry <http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn namespaces
This is the defining document.
