Abstract This document describes two technology independent extensions to Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS).
The first extension defines the new switching type Data Channel Switching Capable.
Data Channel Switching Capable interfaces are able to support switching of the whole digital channel presented on single channel interfaces.
The second extension defines a new type of generalized label and updates related objects.
The new label is called the Generalized Channel Set Label and allows more than one data plane label to be controlled as part of a Label Switched Path (LSP).
This document describes two technology independent extensions to Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS).
Both of these extensions were initially defined in the context of Ethernet services, see [RFC6004] and [RFC6005], but are generic in nature and may be useful to any switching technology controlled via GMPLS.
The first extension defines a new switching type, which is called Data Channel Switching Capable (DCSC).
DCSC interfaces are able to support switching of the whole digital channel presented on single channel interfaces.
The second extension defines a new type of generalized label and updates related objects.
The new label is called the Generalized Channel Set Label and allows more than one data plane label to be controlled as part of a GMPLS Label Switched Path (LSP).
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Data Channel Switching Current GMPLS switching types are defined in [RFC3945] and [RFC3471] and support switching at the packet (PSC), frame (L2SC), time slot (TDM), frequency (LSC), and fiber (FSC) granularities.
Parallel definitions for these switching types are also made in [RFC4202], [RFC4203], and [RFC5307].
One type of switching that is not well represented in this current set is switching that occurs when all data received on an ingress port is switched through a network to an egress port.
While there are similarities between this level of switching and the "opaque single wavelength" case, described in Section 3.5 of [RFC4202], such port to port switching is not limited to the optical switching technology implied by the LSC type.
FSC is also similar, but it is restricted to fiber ports and also supports multiple data channels within a fiber port.
This document defines a new switching type called Data Channel Switching Capable (DCSC).
Port switching seems a more intuitive name, but this naming collides with PSC so is not used.
DCSC interfaces are able to support switching of the whole digital channel presented on single channel interfaces.
Interfaces that inherently support multiple channels, e.g., Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) and channelized TDM interfaces, are specifically excluded from this type.
Any interface that can be represented as a single digital channel are included.
Examples include concatenated TDM and line  encoded interfaces.
Framed interfaces may also be included when they support switching on an interface granularity, for example Ethernet terminated at the physical (port) level and all traffic received on a port is switched to a physical port at the LSP egress.
DCSC is represented in GMPLS, see [RFC3471] and [RFC4202], using the value 125.
The DCSC value is carried in routing protocols in the Interface Switching Capability Descriptor defined in [RFC4202], and used in OSPF [RFC4203] and IS IS [RFC5307].
These documents are not otherwise modified by this document.
The DCSC Switching Type may be used with the Generalized Label Request object, [RFC3473], or the Generalized Channel Set LABEL REQUEST object defined below.
Port labels, as defined in [RFC3471], SHOULD be used for LSPs signaled using the DCSC Switching Type.
Compatibility Transit and egress nodes that do not support the DCSC Switching Type when receiving a Path message with a Label Request containing the DCSC Switching Type will behave in the same way
nodes generally handle the case of an unsupported Switching Type.
Specifically, per [RFC3473], such nodes are required to generate a PathErr message, with a "Routing problem/Unsupported Encoding" indication.
Ingress nodes initiating a Path message containing a Label Request containing the DCSC Switching Type, receiving such a PathErr messages, then notify the requesting application user as appropriate.
Generalized Channel Set Label Related Formats
This section defines a new type of generalized label and updates related objects.
This section updates the label related definitions of [RFC3473].
The ability to communicate more than one label as part of the same LSP was motivated by the support for the communication of one or more VLAN IDs.
Simple concatenation of labels as is done in [RFC4606] was deemed impractical given the large number of VLAN IDs (up to 4096) that may need to be communicated.
The formats defined in this section are not technology specific and may be useful for other switching technologies.
The LABEL SET object defined in [RFC3473]
serves as the foundation for the defined formats.
Generalized Channel Set LABEL REQUEST Object
The Generalized Channel Set LABEL REQUEST object is used to indicate that the Generalized Channel Set LABEL object is to be used with the associated LSP.
The format of the Generalized Channel Set LABEL REQUEST object is the same as the Generalized LABEL REQUEST object and uses a C Type of 5.
Generalized Channel Set LABEL Object
The Generalized Channel Set LABEL Object communicates one or more labels, all of which can be used equivalently in the data path associated with a single LSP.
The format of the Generalized Channel Set LABEL Object is based on the LABEL SET object defined in [RFC3473].
It differs from the LABEL SET
object in that the full set may be represented in a single object rather than the multiple objects required by the [RFC3473]
The object MUST be used on LSPs that use the Generalized Channel Set LABEL REQUEST object.
The object MUST be processed per [RFC3473].
Make before  break procedures, see [RFC3209],
SHOULD be used when modifying the Channel Set LABEL object.
The format of the Generalized Channel Set LABEL object is:  Generalized Channel Set LABEL object:
The Channel Set Subobject size is measured in bytes and MUST always be a multiple of 4, and at least 4, and has the following format:
Action: 8 bits See [RFC3471] for definition of actions.
Range actions SHOULD be used when possible to minimize the size of the Channel Set LABEL Object.
Number of Subchannels: 10 bits Indicates the number of subchannels carried in the subobject.
When the number of subchannels required exceeds the limit of the field, i.e., 1024, multiple Channel Set Subobjects MUST be used.
Note that the size of the subobject may result in a Path message being larger than a single unfragmented IP packet.
See Section 4.4 of [RFC6004] for an example of how this case may be handled.
A value of zero (0) has special meaning and MAY be used in either the LABEL or UPSTREAM LABEL object.
A value of zero (0) is used in a LABEL or UPSTREAM LABEL object to indicate that the subchannel(s) used in the corresponding (downstream or upstream) direction MUST match the subchannel(s) carried in the reverse directions label object.
When value of zero (0) is used, no subchannels are included in the Channel Set Subobject and only one Channel Set Subobject may be present.
The zero (0) value MUST NOT be used in both the LABEL and UPSTREAM LABEL objects of the same LSP.
Note that unacceptable label values continue to be handled according to [RFC3209] and [RFC3473]
, i.e., they result in PathErr or ResvErr messages with a "Routing problem/Unacceptable label value" indication.
For example, in the case where a Resv message containing a zero (0) in both the LABEL and UPSTREAM LABEL objects is received, the node would generate a ResvErr message.
14 bits See [RFC3473] for a description of this field.
Variable See [RFC3471] for a description of this field.
Note that this field might not be 32 bit aligned.
Padding: Variable Padding is used to ensure that the length of a Channel Set Subobject meets the multiple of 4 byte size requirement stated above.
The field is only required when the Subchannel field is not 32 bit aligned and the number of included Subchannel fields result in the Subobject not being 32 bit aligned.
The Padding field MUST be included when the number of bits represented in all the Subchannel fields included in a Generalized Channel Set Subobject result in the Subobject not being 32 bit aligned.
When present, the Padding field MUST have a length that results in the Subobject being 32 bit aligned.
When present, the Padding field MUST be set to a zero (0) value on transmission and MUST be ignored on receipt.
These bits SHOULD be passed through unmodified by transit nodes.
Note that the overall length of a Channel Set Subobject is determined based on the value of the Num Subchannels field together with the size of each Subchannel field as well as any required padding.
The size of the Subchannel field is uniquely identified by the Label Type field.
The previous section introduced a new LABEL object.
As such the formats of the other label related objects and subobjects are also impacted.
Processing of these objects and subobjects is not modified and remains per their respective specifications.
The other label related objects and subobjects are defined in [RFC3473] and include: SUGGESTED LABEL object
LABEL SET object ACCEPTABLE LABEL
Label ERO subobject Label RRO subobject
The label related objects and subobjects each contain a Label field, all of which may carry any label type.
As any label type may be carried, the introduction of a new label type means that the new label type may be carried in the Label field of each of the label  related objects and subobjects.
No new definition needs to specified as their original specification is label type agnostic.
Compatibility Transit and egress nodes that do not support the Generalized Channel Set Label related formats will first receive a Path message containing Generalized Channel Set LABEL REQUEST object.
When such a node receives the Path message, per [RFC3209], it will send a PathErr with the error code "Unknown object C Type".
Ingress nodes initiating a Path message containing a Generalized Channel Set LABEL REQUEST object on receiving such a PathErr messages, then notify the requesting application user as appropriate.
IANA Considerations IANA has assigned new values for namespaces defined in this document and summarized in this section.
The registries are available from http://www.iana.org.
Data Channel Switching Type IANA has made the following assignment in the "Switching Types" section of the "GMPLS Signaling Parameters" registry.
Data Channel Switching Capable (DCSC)
The assigned value is reflected in IANAGmplsSwitchingTypeTC of the IANA GMPLS TC MIB available from http://www.iana.org.
Generalized Channel Set LABEL REQUEST Object IANA has made the following assignment in the "Class Names, Class Numbers, and Class Types" section of the "RSVP PARAMETERS" registry.
Generalized Channel Set LABEL Object IANA has made the following assignment in the "Class Names, Class Numbers, and Class Types" section of the "RSVP PARAMETERS" registry.
This document introduces new message object formats for use in GMPLS signaling [RFC3473].
It does not introduce any new signaling messages, nor change the relationship between LSRs that are adjacent in the control plane.
As such, this document introduces no additional security considerations.
See [RFC3473] for relevant security considerations.
Additionally, the existing framework for MPLS and GMPLS security is documented in [RFC5920].
