During  several  previous  SATNET  meetings,  it  has   been observed  that  it  would  be  useful  for BBN to be able to access the European side of SATNET indirectly  via
the  VAN Gateway,  when  direct  SATNET
This short  paper  proposes  a  possible  approach  to  such "backup" access, using the source routing option of IP.
Figure 1 illustrates the problem we wish to solve.
The  US host  H  is  used  for  diagnosis  and control of the SATNET SIMP's S1 and S2 as well as the gateways B and G and the UCL TAC (not shown, but connected to G).
US/UK Connectivity with Partitioned SATNET
VANgw is the VAN Gateway which encapsulates IP datagrams  in X25  packets for transmission over VAN/PTT virtual circuits.
The collection of these paths, called "IP tunnels"  by  UCL, is  addressed  from
U is a UCL host,  the  Terminal  Protocol  Converter,  which provides a path to UK X25 networks.
However, to the Internet world U looks like a host on VANNET, so the path from  U  to UCLNET (shown dotted) does not appear to exist.
Now suppose SATNET is partitioned between S1 and  S2.
Then we  wish  host H to be able to exchange IP datagrams with S2 via the "back door" path: H Internet VANgw VANNET U UCLNET G S2 There are some important rules in this game, however.
This is because we do not want the Internet to route ALL  its  traffic (e.g. rsre traffic and UCL traffic that is required to use SATNET) via the  IP  Tunnel.
we  are willing  to have some special code in H and/or in U, but not in G, S2, or VANgw.
Note:  Jack  Haverty  is  allowed  to  violate
though  we  doubt that he will want to.
But we must stick to it.
Given these constraints, we claim  that  the  only  possible solution  is  to  "mung" the headers of IP datagrams at UCL.
TAC  are unreachable  from  all US gateways.
Therefore, if H sends  a  packet   addressed   to   one   of
will  be  discarded  and  an ICMP unreachable message returned.
Similarly, the IP address of H is  unreachable  from the  UK  side.
Hence, if the XNET debugger in a UK host emits a return  packet  addressed  to  H,  that packet will be dropped.
Therefore, the destination address of  each  packet  from  H must be changed in order to reach the UCL side of SATNET (S2 or G), and the source address of each of these packets  must be  changed
so  that  return packets can reach H.  For this purpose, we introduce the Munger host M  (see Figure 2).
Introduction of Header Munger at UCL Host "M" (M1/M2) is mulit homed, appearing  as  host  M2  on VANNET  and  as  host
Like host U (shown in Figure 1), host  M2  is  the  end  of
an  IP  Tunnel  which communicates with VANgw over an X25 virtual call.
December 1982 Suppose for example that host H desiollege London December 1982
Suppose for example that host H desires to  reach
the  XNET debugger  in  the  SIMP  S2.
H  must send its packets with destination address M1; these will be routed to M1 via VANgw and  the IP Tunnel.
Host M will change the headers of these datagrams to contain source address M1 and  destination  S2.
will  return packets to M1, and M1 will change them back to M2 H packets and launch them back through the VANNET  to H.
How does M know how to change the headers?
We propose instead to use the SOURCE ROUTING  option in  the  datagrams.
This assumes that H is able to build source routed datagrams, and is not upset that the intermediate host in the route is not a gateway.
If we further assume that the IP layers in G and  S2 can  handle  source and return routes, then the task is  simple.
M  must  contain  the  source   routing algorithm  of  a  gateway,  but otherwise act as two hosts (no routing updates, etc).
Although G supports source routing, S2 and  the  TAC may  not.
In that case, S2 and the TAC will not be able to recognise the return  route  in
a  received packet  and use it as a source route in packets sent in reply.
This possibility calls for additional complexity  in M, a combination of (1) and (2):
addresses  would  be controlled by a table in M. December 1982
We suggest that M use source routing to get  packets from  H  to  S2,  and meanwhile build a "soft state" table showing this mapping.
When  a  packet  comes from S2 without source routing, M would consult this soft state  table  to
the addresses to reach H again.
This would  allow  only one US host at a time to access a given SATNET host, but surely this is no restriction.
In practice, M2 and U should have different IP  tunnels  and hence  different  DTE  addresses.
Since the caller pays the X25 charges, the IP Tunnel for U
normally  be  opened only  by UCL.
On the other hand, the IP Tunnel to M2 will be opened from the US end.
Since UCL has only  one  PSS  line, this requires the use of separate X25 subaddresses.
The VAN gateway must handle 14 digit X121 addresses, as well  as  12 digit addresses.
