Abstract This document contains the registration for two media feature tags: "charset" and "language".
These media features allow specification of character sets and human languages that can be understood by devices and the devices' users.
The templates in this document are derived from RFC 2506.
(Media feature tags mailing list)
Subject: Registration of media feature tag charset Media feature tag name:
charset ASN.1 identifier associated with feature tag:
1.3.6.1.8.1.31 Summary of the media feature indicated by this feature tag:
Ability to display particular charsets as defined in [CHARSET].
For most devices, this media feature is usually a capability; that is, most devices cannot intelligently process text in a charset that is unknown to the device.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag: The values are tokens as defined in [CHARSET].
The values can only be compared for equality.
Comparison is not case sensitive.
Aliases for charsets should not be used in media feature expressions because feature expression manipulation tools may convert aliases to the the principal name for the charset.
Even though charset names are not case sensitive, values should be expressed as all lowercase letters to increase the likelihood of interoperability.
The "charset" capability should always be indicated in conjunction with any capability to handle textual data.
If it is known that there is a security bug in the display of a particular charset in a particular environment, knowing that a device can accept that charset may slightly help an attacker.
Additional information: None Name(s) & email address(es) of person(s) to contact for further information:
IETF Requested IANA publication delay:
None Other information: None 2.
(Media feature tags mailing list)
Subject: Registration of media feature tag language Media feature tag name: language ASN.1 identifier associated with feature tag:
1.3.6.1.8.1.32 Summary of the media feature indicated by this feature tag:  Ability to display particular human languages as defined in [LANG].
Note that "display" in this case will most often mean speech by a computer.
For most devices, this media feature is a preference, not a requirement.
Values appropriate for use with this feature tag: The values are tokens, with allowable values defined by registration as defined in [LANG].
The values can only be compared for equality.
As described in [LANG], language tags are always handled as a single token, and "subtags" are not used for comparison.
Comparison is not case sensitive.
0.5 ) Related standards or documents: "Tags for the Identification of Languages", RFC 1766 Considerations particular to use in individual applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: None Interoperability considerations: Even though language tags are not case sensitive, values should be expressed as all lowercase letters to increase the likelihood of interoperability.
If it is known that there is a security bug in the display of a particular language in a particular environment, knowing that a device can accept that language may slightly help an attacker.
Additional information: None Name(s) & email address(es) of person(s) to contact for further information:
IETF Requested IANA publication delay:
None Other information: None 3.
The security considerations are listed in the two registrations above.
The bulk of this document is IANA registrations.
