The QUOTA extension of the Internet Message Access Protocol [IMAP4] permits administrative limits on resource usage (quotas) to be manipulated through the IMAP protocol.
Conventions Used in this Document
In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and server respectively.
The QUOTA extension is present in any IMAP4 implementation which returns "QUOTA" as one of the supported capabilities to the CAPABILITY command.
An IMAP4 server which supports the QUOTA capability may support limits on any number of resources.
Each resource has an atom name and an implementation defined interpretation which evaluates to an integer.
octets MESSAGE    Number of messages
Each mailbox has zero or more implementation defined named "quota roots".
Each quota root has zero or more resource limits.
All mailboxes that share the same named quota root share the resource limits of the quota root.
Quota root names do not necessarily have to match the names of existing mailboxes.
SETQUOTA Command Arguments:  quota root list of resource
OK setquota completed NO setquota error: can't set that data BAD command unknown or arguments invalid
The SETQUOTA command takes the name of a mailbox quota root and a list of resource limits.
The resource limits for the named quota root are changed to be the specified limits.
Any previous resource limits for the named quota root are discarded.
If the named quota root did not previously exist, an implementation may optionally create it and change the quota roots for any number of existing mailboxes in an implementation defined manner.
A001 OK Setquota completed 4.2.
GETQUOTA Command Arguments:  quota root Data:
OK getquota completed NO getquota
no  such  quota  root,  permission denied BAD command unknown or arguments
The GETQUOTA command takes the name of a quota root and returns the quota root's resource usage and limits in an untagged QUOTA response.
A003 OK Getquota completed 4.3.
GETQUOTAROOT Command Arguments:  mailbox name Data:
OK getquota completed NO getquota error:
no such mailbox, permission denied BAD command unknown or arguments
The GETQUOTAROOT command takes the name of a mailbox and returns the list of quota roots for the mailbox in an untagged QUOTAROOT response.
For each listed quota root, it also returns the quota root's resource usage and limits in an untagged QUOTA response.
A003 OK Getquota completed 5.
This response occurs as a result of a GETQUOTA or GETQUOTAROOT command.
The first string is the name of the quota root for which this quota applies.
The name is followed by a S expression format list of the resource usage and limits of the quota root.
The list contains zero or more triplets.
Each triplet conatins a resource name, the current usage of the resource, and the resource limit.
Resources not named in the list are not limited in the quota root.
Thus, an empty list means there are no administrative resource limits in the quota root.
zero or more quota root names
This response occurs as a result of a GETQUOTAROOT command.
The first string is the mailbox and the remaining strings are the names of the quota roots for the mailbox.
Except as noted otherwise, all alphabetic characters are case  insensitive.
The use of upper or lower case characters to define token strings is for editorial clarity only.
Implementations MUST accept these strings in a case insensitive fashion.
Security Considerations Implementors should be careful to make sure the implementation of these commands does not violate the site's security policy.
The resource usage of other users is likely to be considered confidential information and should not be divulged to unauthorized persons.
