Abstract Traditional mail systems handle only ASCII characters in SMTP envelope and mail header fields.
The Email Address Internationalization (UTF8SMTP) extension allows UTF 8 characters in SMTP envelope and mail header fields.
To avoid rejecting internationalized email messages when a server in the delivery path does not support the UTF8SMTP extension, some sort of converting mechanism is required.
This document describes a downgrading mechanism for Email Address Internationalization.
Note that this is a way to downgrade, not tunnel.
There is no associated up conversion mechanism, although internationalized email clients might use original internationalized addresses or other data when displaying or replying to downgraded messages.
1.  Introduction Traditional mail systems, which are defined by [RFC5321] and [RFC5322], allow ASCII characters in SMTP envelope and mail header field values.
The UTF8SMTP extension ([RFC4952], [RFC5335], and [RFC5336]) allows UTF 8 characters in SMTP envelope and mail header field values.
If an envelope address or header field contains non ASCII characters, the message cannot be delivered unless every system in the delivery path supports
This document describes a downgrading mechanism to avoid rejection of such messages when a server that does not support the UTF8SMTP extension is encountered.
This downgrading mechanism converts envelope and mail header fields to an all ASCII representation.
[RFC5335] allows UTF 8 characters to be used in mail header fields and MIME header fields.
The downgrading mechanism specified here converts mail header fields and MIME header fields to ASCII.
This document does not change any protocols except by defining new header fields.
It describes the conversion method from the internationalized email envelopes/messages that are defined in [RFC4952]
, [RFC5335], and [RFC5336] to the traditional email envelopes/messages defined in [RFC5321] and [RFC5322].
Section 3.2 of [RFC5336] defines when downgrading occurs.
If the SMTP client has a UTF8SMTP envelope or an internationalized message and the SMTP server doesn't support the UTF8SMTP extension, then the SMTP client MUST NOT send a UTF8SMTP envelope or an internationalized message to the SMTP server.
The section lists 4 choices in this case.
The fourth choice is downgrading, as described here.
Downgrading may be implemented in Mail User Agents (MUAs), Mail Submission Agents (MSAs), and Mail Transport Agents (MTAs) that act as SMTP clients.
It may also be implemented in Message Delivery Agents (MDAs), Post Office Protocol (POP) servers, and IMAP servers that store or offer UTF8SMTP envelopes or internationalized messages to non UTF8SMTP compliant systems, which include message stores.
This document tries to define the downgrading process clearly and it preserves the original internationalized email information as much as possible.
UTF8SMTP consists of the following four parts:  New header field definitions
SMTP downgrading  Email header field downgrading  MIME header field downgrading In Section 3 of this document, many header fields starting with "Downgraded " are introduced.
They preserve the original envelope information and the original header fields.
SMTP downgrading is described in Section 4.
It generates ASCII only envelope information from a UTF8SMTP envelope.
Email header field downgrading is described in Section 5.
It generates ASCII only header fields.
MIME header fields are expanded in [RFC5335].
MIME header field downgrading is described in Section 6.
It generates ASCII only MIME header fields.
Displaying downgraded messages that originally contained internationalized email addresses or internationalized header fields is described in an another document ([DISPLAY]).
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
All specialized terms used in this specification are defined in the Email Address Internationalization (EAI) overview [RFC4952], in the mail specifications [RFC5321] [RFC5322], or in the MIME documents
The terms "ASCII address", "internationalized email address", "non ASCII address", "i18mail address", "UTF8SMTP", "message", and "mailing list" are used with the definitions from [RFC4952].
This document depends on [RFC5335], [RFC5336], and [RFC5337].
Key words used in those documents are used in this document, too.
The term "non ASCII" refers to a UTF 8 string that contains at least one non ASCII character.
A "UTF8SMTP envelope" has email originator/recipient addresses expanded by [RFC5336] and [RFC5337].
A "UTF8SMTP message" is an email message expanded by [RFC5335].
New Header Fields Definition New header fields starting with "Downgraded " are defined here to preserve those original envelope and mail header field values that contain UTF 8 characters.
During downgrading, one new "Downgraded " header field is added for each original envelope or mail header field that cannot be passed as is to a server that does not support
The original envelope or mail header field is removed or rewritten.
Only those envelope and mail header fields that contain non ASCII characters are affected.
The result of this process is a message that is compliant with existing email specifications [RFC5321] and [RFC5322].
The original internationalized information can be retrieved by examining the "Downgraded " header fields that were added.
Envelope Information Preservation Header Fields SMTP envelope downgraded information <downgraded envelope addr
> consists of the original non ASCII address and the downgraded all  ASCII address.
The ABNF [RFC5234] syntax is as follows:
<uMailbox> is defined in [RFC5336]; <Mailbox> and <
> are defined in Section 4.1.2 of [RFC5321].
Two header fields, "Downgraded Mail From:" and "Downgraded Rcpt To:", are defined to preserve SMTP envelope downgraded information.
The header field syntax is specified as follows:
The unstructured content is downgraded envelope addr and treated as if it were unstructured, with [RFC2047] encoding (and charset UTF 8) as needed.
Address Header Fields' Preservation Header Fields
The address header fields' preservation header fields are defined to preserve the original header field.
Their value field holds the original header field value.
The header field syntax is specified as follows:
" original headers original headers
To" To preserve a header field in a "Downgraded " header field: 1.
Generate a new "Downgraded " header field whose value is the original header field value.
Treat the generated header field content as if it were unstructured, and then apply [RFC2047] encoding with charset UTF 8 as necessary so that the result is ASCII.
Unknown Header Fields' Preservation Header Fields
The unknown header fields' preservation header fields are defined to encapsulate those original header fields that contain non ASCII characters and are not otherwise provided for in this specification.
The encapsulation header field name is the concatenation of "Downgraded " and the original name.
The value field holds the original header field value.
The header field syntax is specified as follows:
To encapsulate a header field in a "Downgraded " header field: 1.
Generate a new "Downgraded " header field whose value is the original header field value.
Treat the generated header field content as if it were unstructured, and then apply [RFC2047] encoding with charset UTF 8 as necessary
so the result is ASCII.
Remove the original header field.
The targets of downgrading elements in an SMTP envelope are below:  <reverse path
TO command  ORCPT parameter of RCPT TO command <reverse path
<forward path> are described in [RFC5321] and [RFC5336].
The ORCPT parameter is described in [RFC3461] and [RFC5337].
Path Element Downgrading Downgrading the <path> of MAIL FROM and RCPT TO commands uses the ALT ADDRESS parameter defined in [RFC5336].
An SMTP command is downgradable if the <path> contains a non ASCII address and the command has an ALT ADDRESS parameter that specifies an ASCII address.
Since only non ASCII addresses are downgradable, specifying an ALT  ADDRESS value for an all ASCII address is invalid for use with this specification, and no interpretation is assigned to it.
This restriction allows for future extension of the specification even though no such extensions are currently anticipated.
Note that even if no downgrading is performed on the envelope, message header fields and message body MIME header fields that contain non ASCII characters MUST be downgraded.
This is described in Sections 5 and 6.
When downgrading, replace each <path> that contains a non ASCII mail address with its specified alternative ASCII address, and preserve the original information using "Downgraded Mail From" and "Downgraded Rcpt To" header fields as defined in Section 3.
Before replacing, decode the ALT ADDRESS parameter value because it is encoded as xtext [RFC3461].
To avoid disclosing recipient addresses, the downgrading process MUST NOT add the "Downgraded Rcpt To:" header field if the SMTP downgrading targets multiple recipients.
See Section 7 for more details.
As a result of the recipient address downgrading, the domain part of the recipient address prior to downgrading might be different from the domain part of the new recipient address.
If the result of address resolution for the domain part of the new recipient address contains the server at the connection destination of the SMTP session for the recipient address prior to downgrading, the SMTP connection is valid for the new recipient address.
Otherwise, the downgrading process MUST NOT send the downgraded message to the new recipient address via the connection and MUST try to send the downgraded message to the new recipient address.
The "RCPT TO" command can have an ORCPT parameter if the Delivery Status Notification (DSN) extension [RFC3461] is supported.
If the ORCPT parameter contains a "utf 8" type address and the address contains raw non ASCII characters, the address MUST be converted to utf 8 addr xtext form.
Those forms are described in [RFC5337] and clarified by successor documents such as [DSNBIS].
Before converting to utf 8 addr xtext form, remove xtext encoding.
Email Header Fields Downgrading This section defines the conversion method to ASCII for each header field that may contain non ASCII characters.
[RFC5335] expands "Received:" header fields;
[RFC5322] describes ABNF elements <mailbox>, <word>, <comment>, <unstructured>; [RFC2045] describes ABNF element <value
Downgrading Method for Each ABNF Element Header field downgrading is defined below for each ABNF element.
Downgrading an unknown header field is also defined as ENCAPSULATION downgrading.
Converting the header field terminates when no non  ASCII characters remain in the header field.
If the header field name is "Received:" and the FOR clause contains a non ASCII address, remove the FOR clause from the header field.
Other parts (not counting <comment>s) should not contain non ASCII values.
If the header field has an <unstructured> field that contains non  ASCII characters, apply [RFC2047] encoding with charset UTF 8.
If the header field has any <word> fields that contain non ASCII characters, apply [RFC2047] encoding with charset UTF 8.
If the header field has any <comment> fields that contain non ASCII characters, apply [RFC2047] encoding with charset UTF 8.
If the header field has any <value> elements defined by [RFC2045] and the elements contain non ASCII characters, encode the <value> elements according to [RFC2231] with charset UTF 8 and leave the language information empty.
If the <value> element is <quoted  string
and it contains <CFWS> outside the DQUOTE, remove the <CFWS> before this conversion.
If the header field has any <address> (<mailbox> or <group>) elements and they have <display name> elements that contain non ASCII characters, encode the <display name> elements according to [RFC2047] with charset UTF 8.
DISPLAY NAME downgrading is the same algorithm as WORD downgrading.
The <mailbox> elements have no equivalent format for non ASCII addresses.
If the header field has any <mailbox> elements that contain non ASCII characters, preserve the header field in the corresponding "Downgraded " header field, which is defined in Section 3.2, and rewrite each <mailbox> element to ASCII only format.
The <mailbox> element that contains non ASCII characters is one of three formats.
> encoded according to [RFC2047].
If the header field contains non ASCII characters and is such that no rule is given above, encapsulate it in a "Downgraded " header field as described in Section 3.3 as a last resort.
Applying this procedure to "Received:" header field is prohibited.
If the header field contains <utf 8 type addr
the <utf 8 type  addr> contains raw non ASCII characters, it is in utf 8 address form.
Convert it to utf 8 addr xtext form as described in Section 4.2.
COMMENT downgrading is also performed in this case.
If the address type is unrecognized and the header field contains non ASCII characters, then fall back to using ENCAPSULATION downgrading on the entire header field.
Downgrading Method for Each Header Field Header fields are listed in [RFC4021].
This section describes the downgrading method for each header field.
If the whole mail header field does not contain non ASCII characters, email header field downgrading is not required.
Each header field's downgrading method is described below.
Address Header Fields That Contain <address
Bcc: Reply To: Resent From: Resent Sender: Resent To:
To: If the header field contains <mailbox> elements that contain non  ASCII addresses, preserve the header field in a "Downgraded " header field before the conversion.
Then perform COMMENT downgrading, DISPLAY NAME downgrading, and MAILBOX downgrading.
Address Header Fields with Typed Addresses Original Recipient:
Final Recipient: If the header field contains non ASCII characters, perform TYPED  ADDRESS downgrading.
Downgrading Non ASCII in Comments Date
In Reply To: References: Resent Date:
Content Transfer Encoding: Content Language:
These header fields do not contain non ASCII characters except in comments.
If the header field contains UTF 8 characters in comments, perform COMMENT downgrading.
Perform COMMENT downgrading and RECEIVED downgrading.
MIME Content Header Fields Content Type:
Perform MIME VALUE downgrading and COMMENT downgrading.
> Keywords: Perform WORD downgrading.
Other Header Fields For all other header fields that contain non ASCII characters, are user defined, and are missing from this document or future defined header fields, perform ENCAPSULATION downgrading.
If the software understands the header field's structure and a downgrading algorithm other than ENCAPSULATION is applicable, that software SHOULD use that algorithm; ENCAPSULATION downgrading is used as a last resort.
Mailing list header fields (those that start in "List ") are part of this category.
MIME Body Part Header Field Downgrading MIME body part header fields may contain non ASCII characters [RFC5335].
This section defines the conversion method to ASCII only header fields for each MIME header field that contains non ASCII characters.
Parse the message body's MIME structure at all levels and check each MIME header field to see whether it contains non ASCII characters.
If the header field contains non ASCII characters in the header field value, the header field is a target of the MIME body  part header field's downgrading.
Each MIME header field's downgrading method is described below.
COMMENT downgrading, MIME  VALUE downgrading, and
UNSTRUCTURED downgrading are described in Section 5.
Content ID: The "Content ID:" header field does not contain non ASCII characters except in comments.
If the header field contains UTF 8 characters in comments, perform COMMENT downgrading.
Perform MIME VALUE downgrading and COMMENT downgrading.
A downgraded message's header fields contain ASCII characters only.
But they still contain MIME encapsulated header fields that contain non ASCII UTF 8 characters.
Furthermore, the body part may contain UTF 8 characters.
Implementations parsing Internet messages need to accept UTF 8 body parts and UTF 8 header fields that are MIME  encoded.
Thus, this document inherits the security considerations of MIME encoded header fields ([RFC2047] and [RFC3629]).
Rewriting header fields increases the opportunities for undetected spoofing by malicious senders.
However, rewritten header fields are preserved into Downgraded   header fields, and parsing Downgraded   header fields enables the detection of spoofing caused by downgrading.
Addresses that do not appear in the message header fields may appear in the RCPT commands to an SMTP server for a number of reasons.
Copying information from the envelope into the header fields risks inadvertent information disclosure (see [RFC5321] and Section 4 of this document).
Mitigating inadvertent information disclosure is also discussed in these locations.
The techniques described here invalidate methods that depend on digital signatures over the envelope or any part of the message, which includes the top level header fields and body part header fields.
Depending on the specific message being downgraded, the following techniques are likely to break: DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM), and possibly S/MIME and Pretty Good Privacy (PGP).
The two obvious mitigations are to stick to 7 bit transport when using these techniques (as most/all of them presently require) or to make sure to have UTF8SMTP end to end when needed.
Many gateways and servers on the Internet will discard header fields with which they are not familiar.
To the extent to which the downgrade procedures depend on new header fields (e.g., "Downgraded ") to avoid information loss, the risk of having those header fields dropped and subsequent implications must be identified.
In particular, if the "Downgraded " header fields are dropped, there is no possibility of reconstructing the original information at any point (before, during, or after delivery).
Such gateways violate [RFC2979] and can be upgraded to correct the problem.
Even though the information is not lost, the original message cannot be perfectly reconstructed because some downgrading methods remove information (see Sections 5.1.1 and 5.1.5).
Hence, downgrading is a one way process.
While information in any email header field should usually be treated with some suspicion, current email systems commonly employ various mechanisms and protocols to make the information more trustworthy.
Currently, information in the new Downgraded   header fields is usually not inspected by these mechanisms, and may be even less trustworthy than the traditional header fields.
Note that the Downgraded   header fields could have been inserted with malicious intent (and with content unrelated to the traditional header fields).
If an internationalized MUA would simply try to "upgrade" the message for display purposes (that is, display the information in the Downgraded   header fields instead of the traditional header fields), the effectiveness of the deployed mechanisms and protocols is likely to be reduced, and the user may be exposed to additional risks.
More guidance on how to display downgraded messages is given in [DISPLAY].
Concerns about the trustworthiness of the Downgraded   header fields are not limited to displaying and replying in MUAs, and should be carefully considered before using such header fields for other purposes as well.
See the "Security Considerations" section in [RFC4952] for more discussion.
While [RFC2047] has a specific algorithm to deal with whitespace in adjacent encoded words, there are a number of deployed implementations that fail to implement the algorithm correctly.
As a result, whitespace behavior is somewhat unpredictable in practice when multiple encoded words are used.
While RFC 5322 states that implementations SHOULD limit lines to not more than 78 characters, implementations MAY choose to allow overly long encoded words in order to work around faulty [RFC2047] implementations.
Implementations that choose to do so SHOULD have an optional mechanism to limit line length to 78 characters.
Trivial Downgrading Downgrading is an alternative to avoid the rejection of messages that require UTF8SMTP support by a server that does not provide such support.
Implementing the full specification of this document is desirable, but a partial implementation is also possible.
If a partial downgrading implementation confronts an unsupported downgrading target, the implementation MUST NOT send the message to a server that does not support
Instead, it MUST either reject the message or generate a notification of non deliverability.
A partial downgrading, trivial downgrading, is discussed.
It does not support non ASCII addresses in SMTP envelope and address header fields, unknown header field downgrading, or the MIME body part header field downgrading.
It supports:  some simple header field downgrading:
Subject  comments and display name downgrading:
From, To, Cc  trace header field downgrading:
Received Otherwise, the downgrading fails.
Trivial downgrading targets mail messages that are generated by UTF8SMTP aware MUAs and contain non ASCII characters in comments, display names, and unstructured parts without using non ASCII email addresses.
These mail messages usually do not contain non ASCII email addresses in the SMTP envelope and its header fields.
But it is not deliverable via a UTF8SMTP unaware SMTP server.
Implementing full specification downgrading may be hard, but trivial downgrading saves mail messages without using non ASCII addresses.
The SMTP client may encounter a SMTP server that does not support the 8BITMIME SMTP extension [RFC1652].
The server does not support "8bit" or "binary" data.
Implementers need to consider converting "8bit" data to "base64" or "quoted printable" encoded form and adjust the "Content Transfer Encoding" header field accordingly.
If the body contains multiple MIME parts, this conversion MUST be performed for each MIME part.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the following header fields in the Permanent Message Header Field registry, in accordance with the procedures set out in [RFC3864].
Header field name:  Downgraded Mail From Applicable protocol:
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Rcpt To Applicable protocol:
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Sender Applicable protocol:
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Cc Applicable protocol:  mail
Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Bcc Applicable protocol:  mail
Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Reply To Applicable protocol:
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Resent From Applicable protocol:
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Resent Sender Applicable protocol:  mail
Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Resent To Applicable protocol:
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Resent Cc Applicable protocol:
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Downgraded Resent Bcc Applicable protocol:
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Resent Reply To Applicable protocol:
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Return Path Applicable protocol:  mail
Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Header field name:  Downgraded Disposition Notification To Applicable protocol:
mail Status:  experimental Author/change controller:  IETF Specification document(s):
Furthermore, IANA is requested to refuse registration of all field names that start with "Downgraded ".
For unknown header fields, use the downgrading method described in Section 3.3 to avoid conflicts with existing IETF activity (Email Address Internationalization).
This appendix shows an SMTP downgrading example.
Consider a mail message where:  The sender address is "NON ASCII local@example.com", which is a non ASCII address.
Its ASCII alternative is "ASCII local@example.com" and its display name is "DISPLAY local".
The "To:" address is "NON ASCII remote1@example.net", which is a non ASCII address.
Its ASCII alternative is "ASCII remote1@example.net" and its display name is "DISPLAY  remote1".
The "Cc:" address is a non ASCII address, "NON ASCII remote2@example.org", without an alternative ASCII address.
Its display name is "DISPLAY remote2".
Three display names contain non ASCII characters.
The Subject header field is "NON ASCII SUBJECT", which contains non ASCII characters.
the "To:" recipient's MTA (example.net) does not support UTF8SMTP.
the "Cc:" recipient's MTA (example.org) supports
The first example SMTP envelope/message is shown in Figure 1.
In this example, the "To:" recipient's session is the focus.
MESSAGE ID Mime Version: 1.0 Content Type: text/plain
; charset "UTF 8" Content Transfer Encoding:
NON ASCII SUBJECT From: DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
To: DISPLAY remote1 <NON ASCII remote1@example.net
DISPLAY remote2 <NON ASCII remote2@example.org
> Date: DATE MAIL BODY Figure 1: Original envelope/message (example 1)
In this example, there are two SMTP recipients; one is "To:", the other is "Cc:".
The SMTP downgrading uses To: session downgrading.
Figure 2 shows an SMTP downgraded example.
MESSAGE ID Mime Version: 1.0 Content Type: text/plain
; charset "UTF 8" Content Transfer Encoding:
NON ASCII SUBJECT From: DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
To: DISPLAY remote1 <NON ASCII remote1@example.net
DISPLAY remote2 <NON ASCII remote2@example.org
> Date: DATE MAIL BODY Figure 2:
SMTP downgraded envelope/message (example 1)
After SMTP downgrading, header field downgrading is performed.
The final downgraded message is shown in Figure 3.
A Return Path header field will be added by the final destination MTA.
MESSAGE ID Mime Version: 1.0 Content Type: text/plain
; charset "UTF 8" Content Transfer Encoding:
UTF 8?Q?DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
Date: DATE MAIL BODY Figure 3:
Downgraded message (example 1) A.2.
In many cases, the sender wants to use a non ASCII address and the recipient is a traditional mail user.
The SMTP server handing mail for the recipient and/or the recipient's MUA does not support UTF8SMTP extension.
Consider a mail message where:  The sender address is "NON ASCII local@example.com", which is a non ASCII address.
Its ASCII alternative is "ASCII local@example.com".
It has a display name "DISPLAY local", which contains non ASCII characters.
The "To:" address is "ASCII remote1@example.net", which is ASCII  only.
It has a display name, "DISPLAY remote1", which contains non ASCII characters.
The "Subject:" header field is "NON ASCII SUBJECT", which contains non ASCII characters.
The second example envelope/message is shown in Figure 4.
MAIL From: <NON ASCII local@example.com
MESSAGE ID Mime Version: 1.0 Content Type: text/plain
; charset "UTF 8" Content Transfer Encoding:
NON ASCII SUBJECT From: DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
> Date: DATE MAIL BODY Figure 4: Original message (example 2)
In this example, SMTP session is downgradable.
Figure 5 shows an SMTP downgraded envelope/message.
MESSAGE ID Mime Version: 1.0 Content Type: text/plain
; charset "UTF 8" Content Transfer Encoding:
NON ASCII SUBJECT From: DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
DATE MAIL BODY Figure 5:
SMTP downgraded envelope/message (example 2)
After SMTP downgrading, header field downgrading is performed.
The downgraded example is shown in Figure 6.
MESSAGE ID Mime Version: 1.0 Content Type: text/plain
; charset "UTF 8" Content Transfer Encoding:
UTF 8?Q?DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
> Date: DATE MAIL BODY Figure 6:
