DCNET Internet Clock Service D.L. Mills, COMSAT Laboratories
Following  is  a  description  of  the  Internet  Clock Service  (ICS)  provided  by  all DCNET hosts.
The service, intended primarily for  clock  synchronization  and  one way delay  measurements  with  cooperating  internet  hosts,  is provided using the Timestamp and Timestamp Reply messages of the  proposed  Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP).
In addition, in order to maintain  compatability  with  present systems,  this  service  will be provided for a limited time using  the   Echo   and   Echo   Reply   messages   of   the Gateway Gateway Protocol (GGP).
It should be understood that ICMP and GGP datagrams are normally  considered  tightly bound to the Internet Protocol (IP) itself and not directly accessable to  the  user  on
a TOPS 20  system,  for  example.
These datagrams are treated somewhat differently from user  datagrams  in
gateways  and DCNET hosts in that certain internal queueing mechanisms are bypassed.
Thus, they can be a useful tool in providing  the most   accurate   and  stable  time  reference.
The  prime motivation for this note is to promote  the  development  of this  service  in  other internet hosts and gateways so that the feasibility for its use thoughout the community
At present, the ICS is provided using  either  ICMP  or GGP  datagrams.
The  only difference between these is that ICMP uses protocol number 1 and GGP uses protocol number
The originator fills in all three timestamp fields just before  the datagram is forwarded to the net.
Each of these fields contain the local time at origination.
Although  the last   two   are   redundant,  they  allow  roundtrip  delay measurements  to
be  made  using   remote   hosts   without timestamping  facilities.
The "Type" field can be either 8 (GGP Echo) or 13 (ICMP Timestamp).
The "Code" field  should be zero.
The "Sequence" field can contain either zero or an optional sequence number provided by the user.
The  length of  the datagram is thus 36 octets inclusive of the 20 octet internet header and exclusive of the local network leader.
The host or gateway receiving an ICS datagram fills  in the  "Receive  Timestamp"  field
the  datagram is received from the net and the "Transmit Timestamp"  just  as it is forwarded back to the sender.
It also sets the "Type" field to 0 (GGP Echo Reply), if the original value was 8, or 14  (ICMP  Timestamp  Reply),  if  it was 13.
The remaining fields are unchanged.
The timestamp values are in milliseconds from  midnight UT and are stored right justified in the 32 bit fields shown above.
Ordinarily,  all  time  calculations  are  performed modulo 24 hours in milliseconds.
This provides a convenient match to those operating systems  which  maintain  a  system clock  in ticks past midnight.
The specified timestamp unit of milliseconds is consistent with the accuracy of  existing radio  clocks  and  the  errors expected in the timestamping process itself.
Delay Measurements Delay measurements can be made with any DCNET  host  by simply sending an ICS datagram in the above format to it and processing the reply.
Let t1, t2 and t3 represent the three timestamp  fields  of  the reply in order and t4 the time of (t2 t1)
(t4 t3)  for the roundtrip.
Note that, in the case of the roundtrip, the clock offsets between the sending host and DCNET host cancel.
Although ICS datagrams are returned by all DCNET
hosts regardless  of  other connections that may be in use by that host at any given time, the most useful host  will  probably be   the   COMSAT
WWV   virtual  host  at  internet  address [29,0,9,2], which is also the  internet  echo
virtual  host formerly  called  COMSAT ECH.
This virtual host is resident in  the  COMSAT GAT  physical  host  at   internet   address [29,0,1,2], which is connected to the ARPANET via the COMSAT Gateway, Clarksburg SIMP and a 4800 bps line to  IMP
Gateway  is  typically  550 milliseconds as the ICS datagram flies.
As in the case of all DCNET hosts,  if  the  COMSAT WWV virtual  host  is  down  (in  this case possible only if the Spectracom radio clock is down or misbehaving)
In   unusual circumstances a "net not reachable" or "source  quench"  GGP datagram  could  be  returned.
Note that the references to "GGP" here will be read "ICMP" at  some  appropriate  future time.
All DCNET timestamps are  referenced  to  a  designated virtual  host  called  COMSAT WWV
This host is equipped with a Spectracom radio
clock  which  normally provides WWVB time and date to within a millisecond.
mechanism provides  offset  and  drift  corrections  for  other  hosts relative to this host; however, offsets up to an appreciable fraction  of
a second routinely occur due to the difficulty of tracking with power line  clocks  in  some  machines.
the  current  offsets  can  be obtained using the following procedure.
Connect  to  COMSAT GAT   host   at   internet   address [29,0,1,2]
using TELNET and local echo.
Send the command SET HOST HOST.
A table with  one  line per DCNET host should be returned.
Note the entry under the "Offset" column for the WWV host.
This contains the offset  in  milliseconds
that  should  be  added to all timestamps  generated  by  either  the   COMSAT GAT   or COMSAT WWV  hosts to yield the correct time as broadcast by WWVB.
The string  following  this  is  the  last  reply received from the Spectracom unit in the format:
where <code> is normally <SP>
in case the WWVB signal is being  received  correctly  or ?
in case it is not.
The DDD represents the day of the year and HH:
MM:SS the time past   UT   midnight.
The  two  digits  following  TZ  represent the time zone, here 00 for UT. 4.
REFERENCES [1]  ICMP Postel, J., "Internet Control Message Protocol", RFC 777, USC/Information Sciences Institute, April 1981.
;Beginning of original ;internet header GH.ORG:  .BLKW
;End of timestamp header Note that all  PDP11  word  fields  (.BLKW
