, I have decided to reissue the first of our experimental site status reports.
In compiling RFC #235, I followed the principle that timeliness was somewhat more important than extremely careful editing; this seemed to me to be in keeping with the original RFC philosophy.
I am sorry for any embarrassment this may have caused to anyone associated with the Network, and accept full responsibility for the content of RFC #235.
I will try to do a better job in the future.
Alex McKenzie SITE STATUS Beginning with this RFC, BBN will report on the status of most Network Hosts approximately once every two weeks.
The information for these reports will be gained from talking to people at each site, and from experimental "data".
These data will be the results of daily attempts to log into each of the Hosts which might be accessible to a Network user; the attempts will have been made from the BBN prototype Terminal IMP at a random time each weekday.
Several Hosts are currently excluded from the daily testing.
These Hosts fall into two categories:
1)   Hosts which are note expected to be functioning on the Network as servers (available for use from other sites) for at least a month.
Hosts which are currently intended to be users only.
Included here are the Terminal IMPs presently in the Network (AMES, MITRE, and BBN[1]).
This category also includes the Network Control Center computer (Network Address 5) which is use solely for gathering statistics from the Network.
Finally, included among these Hosts are the following:
The tables on the next two pages condense the information on Host status for September 13 through September 24.
Remote Job Service now, Time sharing in January
(Destination Host either dead orinaccessible (due to network partitioning or local IMP failure) from the BBN Terminal IMP).
(Destination Host returned a CLS to the initial RFC.)
(Destination Host did not respond in any way to the initial RFC, although not dead.)
(Destination Host opened a connection but then either immediately close it, or did not respond any further.)
(Destination Host opened a connection and was accessible to users.)
The BBN Terminal IMP (Network Address 158) is a prototype, and as such is frequently not connected to the Network, but being used to refine and debug the Terminal IMP programs.
The UCLA IBM 360 is at the moment only able to handle Remote Job Service.
BBN is not equipped to test this, but is assuming that receipt of their canned message indicates that RJS is also functioning.
