Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) media type is a general "family" or "container" type for electronic mail reports of any kind.
Although this memo defines only the use of the multipart/report media type with respect to delivery status reports, mail processing programs will benefit if a single media type is used for all kinds of reports.
This memo obsoletes "The Multipart/Report Content Type for the Reporting of Mail System Administrative Messages", RFC 3462, and marks RFC 3462 and its predecessor as "Historic".
Introduction [OLD REPORT] and its antecedent declared the multipart/report media type for use within the [MIME] construct to create a container for mail system administrative reports of various kinds.
Practical experience has shown that the general requirement of having that media type constrained to be used only as the outermost MIME type of a message is overly restrictive and limits such things as the transmission of multiple administrative reports within a single overall message container.
In particular, it prevents one from forwarding a report as part of another multipart MIME message.
This memo removes that constraint.
No other changes apart from some editorial ones are made.
Other memos might update other documents to establish or clarify the constraints on use of multipart/report in contexts where such are needed.
This memo obsoletes RFC 3462.
RFC 3462 and its predecessor, RFC 1892, have been marked as "Historic".
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [KEYWORDS].
The multipart/report MIME media type is a general "family" or "container" type for electronic mail reports of any kind.
Although this memo defines only the use of the multipart/report media type with respect to delivery status reports, mail processing programs will benefit if a single media type is used for all kinds of reports.
Per [MIME REG], the multipart/report media type is defined as follows:
Type name:  multipart Subtype name:  report Required parameters:  boundary,
7bit should always be adequate Security considerations:
see Section 1 of [RFC6522
] Published specification:  [RFC6522] Applications that use this media type:  Mail Transfer Agents, Mail User Agents, spam detection and reporting modules, virus detection modules, and message authentication modules.
Additional information: Magic number(s):  N/
N/A Macintosh file type code(s):
N/A Person and email address to contact for further information:
common Restrictions on usage:  none; however, other applications that register report types may establish such restrictions.
Author:  Murray S. Kucherawy <msk@cloudmark.com
The syntax of multipart/report is identical to the multipart/mixed content type defined in [MIME].
The report type parameter identifies the type of report.
The parameter is the MIME subtype of the second body part of the multipart/report.
The multipart/report media type contains either two or three sub  parts, in the following order: 1.
The first body part contains a human readable message.
The purpose of this message is to provide an easily understood description of the condition(s)
that caused the report to be generated, for a human reader who might not have a user agent capable of interpreting the second section of the multipart/ report.
The text in the first section can use any IANA  registered MIME media type, charset, or language.
Where a description of the error is desired in several languages or several media, a multipart/alternative construct MAY be used.
This body part MAY also be used to send detailed information that cannot be easily formatted into the second body part.
A machine parsable body part containing an account of the reported message handling event.
The purpose of this body part is to provide a machine readable description of the condition(s)
that caused the report to be generated, along with details not present in the first body part that might be useful to human experts.
An initial body part, message/delivery status, is defined in [DSN FORMAT].
A body part containing the returned message or a portion thereof.
This information could be useful to aid human experts in diagnosing problems.
(Although it might also be useful to allow the sender to identify the message about which the report was issued, it is hoped that the envelope id and original recipient address returned in the message/report body part will replace the traditional use of the returned content for this purpose.)
Return of content can be wasteful of network bandwidth and a variety of implementation strategies can be used.
Generally, the sender needs to choose the appropriate strategy and inform the recipient of the required level of returned content required.
In the absence of an explicit request for level of return of content such as that provided in [DSN SMTP], the agent that generated the delivery service report SHOULD return the full message content.
When 8 bit or binary data not encoded in a 7 bit form is to be returned, and the return path is not guaranteed to be 8 bit or binary capable, two options are available.
The original message MAY be re encoded into a legal 7 bit MIME message or the text/rfc822 headers media type MAY be used to return only the original message headers.
The text/rfc822 headers Media Type
The text/rfc822 headers media type provides a mechanism to label and return only the [MAIL] header of a failed message.
The header is not the complete message and SHOULD NOT be returned using the message/ rfc822 media type defined in [MIME TYPES].
The returned header is useful for identifying the failed message and for diagnostics based on the Received header fields.
The text/rfc822 headers media type is defined as follows:
Type name:  text Subtype name:  rfc822 headers
None Encoding considerations:  7 bit is sufficient for normal mail headers, however, if the headers are broken or extended and require encoding to make them legal 7 bit content, they MAY be encoded with quoted printable as defined in [MIME].
See Section 7 of [RFC6522].
none Published specification:  [RFC6522] Applications that use this media type:  Mail Transfer Agents, Mail User Agents, spam detection and reporting modules, virus detection modules, and message authentication modules.
Additional information: Magic number(s):  N/
N/A Macintosh file type code(s):
N/A Person and email address to contact for further information:
common Restrictions on usage:  none Author:
The text/rfc822 headers body part SHOULD contain all the mail header fields from the message that caused the report.
The header includes all header fields prior to the first blank line in the message.
They include the MIME Version and MIME content description fields.
Registering New Report Types Registration of new media types for the purpose of creating a new report format SHOULD note in the Intended Usage section of the media type registration that the type being registered is suitable for use as a report type (i.e., the second body part) in the context of this specification.
IANA Considerations IANA has updated the Media Type Registry to indicate that this memo contains the current definition of the multipart/report and text/
rfc822 headers media types, obsoleting [OLD REPORT].
Security Considerations Automated use of report types without authentication presents several security issues.
Forging negative reports presents the opportunity for denial of service attacks when the reports are used for automated maintenance of directories or mailing lists.
Forging positive reports can cause the sender to incorrectly believe a message was delivered when it was not.
A signature covering the entire multipart/report structure could be used to prevent such forgeries; such a signature scheme is, however, beyond the scope of this document.
