A teletype compatible interface to UCSB's Online System (OLS) has been implemented in accordance with the Telnet protocol adopted by the NWG.
This Server Telnet is responsive to connection requests directed by User Telnet's to socket number 1, host address 3.
Although OLS is not a teletype system and although much of its power as mathematical tool rests in its graphical display capabilities, enough of the System survives the Telnet transformation to justify such an implementation.
In this Telnet style implementation of OLS, all curvilinear display generated by the user on Levels II and III, Real and Complex, is disregarded by the System and hence not returned to the user through the Net.
The same is true of the display of special, user created characters.
Although special characters may be constructed and stored, their display will be suppressed, both during the process of construction and later when they are invoked from the Type level.
All other display generated by the System will be relayed to the user intact, in some cases with stylistic transformation having first been applied.
For example, Greek characters are displayed as lower case a z.
All such transformations are described in detail in this document.
Finally, those elements of the System (the operators which edit user programs are prime examples) which assume a fixed screen display device function abnormally in a Telnet environment.
For such a device, the System can "remember" the position on the screen of a previously displayed segment of text and return to that position to, for example, underscore it.
But when the "screen" marches forward   relentlessly   through a continuous medium, as it does with Telnet's virtual teletype, that kind of strategy fails.
Hence, the underscoring is not relocated, but rather appears on the current line, beginning in the next available character frame.
OLS assumes, normally, that the user is equipped with the specially  designed double keyboard depicted in Figure 1.
Conventions are defined in this document, which enable a Telnet user to simulate that keyboard; in particular, a means is provided for designating keys on the upper, or operator keyboard.
This document has three purposes: Figure 1.
[Please view the PDF version of this RFC.]
(1) to describe the means by which a Telnet user simulates an OLS keyboard, (2) to describe the transformations applied to output generated by the System, and (3) to enumerate those aspects of the System, which are unique to or behave differently for Network (Telnet) users.
In particular, this document is not a user's manual for OLS.
Such a manual is available and on file with the NIC.
In addition, a copy should exist at each Network site in its NIC collection; the user should consult his Station Agent.
This document is titled "UCSB On  Line System Manual" [NIC 5748]; its contents are current as of 1 January 71.
A revision to the manual is currently in preparation and will be distributed when available.
In addition, tutorial manuals for two of the subsystems available under OLS MOLSF (Mathematically  Oriented Language Single Precision Floating Point) and COL (Card Oriented Language)   will soon be made available.
The latter has already been published and is being transmitted to the NIC for distribution, while the former is nearing completion.
Documentation of the third subsystem of OLS NET  has already been distributed through the NIC as two RFC's: "Network On Line Operators" [21 April 71, RFC 121, NIC 5833] and "A User Telnet Description of an Initial Implementation" [9 August 71, RFC 206, NIC 7176].
Net currently houses a set of operators for system call level interaction with UCSB's NCP, a User Telnet, and an operator (invoked by ID on Level II), which returns the status of Network hosts.
Staff members at the Computer Center will be happy to field questions about OLS from Network users.
In particular, an OLS consultant is available for such purposes at (805) 961 4044.
Questions about OLS, including those specific to use of the System through the Network, may also be addressed to Jim White, UCSB's Technical Liaison, at (805) 961 3454 (if necessary, messages can be left at the Computer Center Office, (805) 961  2261).
The Network user is encouraged to explore the System and is invited to do so with the following accounting parameters:
57372 User Name: ARPA Problem Name: (affiliation) (name) in 16 characters or less (e.g., UCSB White)
Such use of the System will not be billed.
Production users are asked to establish their own accounts with the Computer Center ((805) 961 2261), the use of which will be billed in accordance with the then current rate structure.
This document is the description of a Network front end to the Online System, logically distinct from OLS itself.
This front end is hereafter referred to as NETOLS.
NETOLS is always responsive to connection requests direct4ed to socket 1.
When contacted by a Network user, NTCLS performs the Network functions required to establish a duplex connection to him.
The number of such duplex connections (and hence the number of Network users) is bounded by an assembly parameter whose current value is five.
Before the Network connection is established, NETOLS secures for the user a port into OLS.
Sixty four such ports exist and are shared by local, dial up, and Network users.
Should none be available, NETOLS will abort the connection sequence.
Once a port has been secured and a Network connection established, NETOLS will effectively push the  SYST  key for the user by transmitting to OLS the 8 bit code representing that key.
A login sequence is thus initiated and the user is transmitted the lines: UCSB ON LINE SYSTEM ENTER USER NUBMER to which he should respond with his user number.
Beginning at this point in time and continuing for the life of the Network connection, NETOLS's sole function is that of interpreter interpreting input from the user and making it meaningful to the user (it is at this point, for example, that curvilinear and special character display are discarded).
When the user breaks his Network connection to NETOLS, if eh hasn't logged out of OLS already, NETOLS performs that function for him by pushing  SYST
just as it pushed the initial  SYST .
The OLS port acquired for the user is then released, and hence available for use by other users.
It should be noted that the user can log out of OLS and back on again without the Network connection's being broken, since that action is transparent to NETOLS, who attaches no special significance to the Key sequence, which accomplishes it.
A major function of NETOLS is to provide a mapping between elements of the Telnet character set and the keys on an OLS keyboard (Figure 1).
The lower, or operand portion of that keyboard is fairly easily represented, since it's similar to a standard typewriter keyboard.
Most of the keys on the lower keyboard are mapped on a one for one basis from elements of the Telnet character set.
Upper case alphabetics are mapped into the alphabetics, lower case, and miscellany of punctuation into itself.
All such one for one mappings are depicted in Figure 2.
A line of that figure reads as follows:
For ['half arrow' see the PDF version of this RFC]:
The key labeled ['half arrow']
Those lower keyboard keys not listed in Figure 2, and  all  the keys on the upper  keyboard (hereafter referred to collectively as  non  standard  keys), are represented by the Telnet user in the following manner.
For each such key, a character string has been defined; the string is called the  name  of the key.
In most cases, the name of a key is identical to its label in Figure 1.
The name of the  SIN  key, for example, is 'SIN (in the Online System User's Manual, upper keyboard keys are denoted by underscoring their labels, to distinguish, for example, the key  SIN  from the three keys 'SIN').
Every non standard key on the OLS keyboard is struck by typing its name (or any unique abbreviation thereof), preceded by a special  prefix  character and followed by a space.
NETOLS interprets the prefix, name, and space from them generates a single, 8 bit code, which forwards to OLS.
The prefix can be changed by the user to any character listed in Figure 2.
The procedure for so doing is described in Section VII B.
To send the prefix character through NETOLS to OLS, type it twice in succession.
The names of all non standard keys are listed in Figure 3.
A line of that figure reads as follows:
For  SIN : They key denoted  SIN  in the OLS User's Manual (the trigonometric function sine) is named 'SIN', and hence is struck by typing 'SIN', preceded by the prefix and followed by a space.
Furthermore, if the user chooses, he may abbreviate that as ';SI ', since the key desired remains uniquely identified.
Further abbreviation (to ';S ') is unsatisfactory and hence disallowed since the single character 'S' is insufficient to distinguish between a number of keys whose names begin with that character.
Key names may be typed by the user in either upper  or lower case.
As each character of a non standard key's name is typed by the user, NETOLS consults it table of key names.
Hence, typing ';SJIN ' will be accepted as  SIN , the erroneous 'J' being ignored (and a question mark echoed), and the subsequent 'JN ' accepted.
If when the terminating space is typed, no single key is uniquely identified a '?'
is echoed and the space ignored.
Keys With One for One Mappings
The Key Name Is [circle .]
(cont'd) Keys Represented As Strings 1.
Alternate names for [circle .]
RETURN can also be represented as the single character CR (carriage return), as indicated in Figure 2.
Alternates for BACK are the single characters BS (backspace) and DEL (rubout), as indicated in Figure 2. 4.
An alternate name for [circle /] is 'DIV'.
NETOLS commands are explained in Section VII.
An alternate name for [circle .]
An alternate name for RETURN is '.'
RETURN can also be represented as the single character CR (carriage return), as indicated in Figure 2.
echoed, indicating that 'S' alone is ambiguous).
NETOLS will then determine whether a key has been uniquely specified by the characters already typed.
If so, it will echo the remaining characters of the key's name, and consider them entered by the user.
A subsequent space from the user will cause the indicated key to be pushed.
If no single key is uniquely specified, NETOLS will echo Bel, causing a bell to be run on many terminals.
More of the key name is then expected from the user.
If after at least one character of the key name has been entered by the user and accepted by NETOLS (and before the terminating space is typed) the prefix is typed a second time, all already entered characters of the name are discarded by NETOLS.
Thus ';CO;SIN ' is interpreted as  SIN .
If a carriage return is typed in the same context, the initial prefix will also be discarded.
A number of commands to LETOLS are defined and all are described in this section.
The format for each such command is the same as that for the non standard keys, and hence the command keywords are included in Figure 3.
All of the conventions of Section VI apply as well to the entry of commands.
The user should understand, however, that such commands are processed by NETOLS, not OLS, and that they are defined only for Network users of OLS.
The HELP command (invoked with ';HELP ' if';' is the prefix) reproduces for the user the third column of Figure 3; the names of all non standard keys and the keywords for all defined NEOLS commands are listed in their collating sequence on the user's virtual teletype.
B.  PREFIX Issuing the PREFIX command causes the next character typed to become the prefix, provided it is one of those listed in Figure 2.
The SHIFT command causes a perturbation of lines 2 and 3 of Figure 2.
After SHIFT is issued, all subsequent upper case alphabetics are mapped into the Greek characters (rather than into the alphabetics), and lower case alphabetics into alphabetics (rather than into the Greek characters).
This convention change may be found convenient if the user's User Telnet sends lower case alphabetics by default, and requires, for example, that a shift key be held down to send upper  case characters.
The UNSHIFT command nullifies the effect of SHIFT.
Issuing the FULLDUPLEX command causes all subsequent characters typed by the user to be echoed by  NETOLS .
HALFDUPLEX nullifies the effect of FULLDUPLEX, disabling echo by NETOLS.
Half duplex is the default situation.
The STATE command causes the current prefix, the mode of operation ('HALFDUPLX' or 'FULLDUPLEX'), and the case convention ('SHIFT IS ON' or 'SHIFT IS OFF') to be displayed on the user's virtual teletype in the following form: PREFIX IS;
HALFDUPLEX SHIFT IS OFF F.
Issuing the LOGOUT command causes the user to be logged out of OLS (i.e.,  SYST
DOWN  to be pushed) and his Network connection to NETOLS to be broken.
About three seconds elapse between the two events.
OLS Display NETOLS suppresses all but alphameric display before it reaches the user.
Alphameric display is mapped into the Telnet character set according to Figures 4 and 5.
Figure 4 lists all those OLS display character, which have one for one mappings.
A line of that figure reads as follows:
Alphabetics are mapped into upper case alphabetics and Greek characters into lower case alphabetics.
Numerics are mapped into numerics, and a miscellany of punctuation into itself.
In addition a number of carriage control characters are appropriately mapped  line feed down into LF, TAB into HT, BACK into BS, etc.
; line feed up is suppressed.
ERASE is represented as Bel.
Figure 5 lists those OLS display characters which are mapped into strings of Telnet characters.
In most cases, these character strings are stylistic representations of characters peculiar to OLS.
Superscripts are represented as underscored numerics.
Carriage return is represented as CR LF.
No attempt is made to effectively represent RS which, on an OLS display device, repositions the beam to the upper left corner of the screen; it is made equivalent to carriage return.
For local users, all echoing
that's done at all  To Display
Line Feed Up CON/[down arrow]
Characters Which Map Into Strings is done by OLS; the terminal never echoes.
In general, OLS does not echo the user's input.
There are exceptions to this rule, but they are relatively few in number and occur primarily on the SYST level.
In particular, upper keyboard keys are never echoed except in List mode.
The Network user is advised to instruct his telnet to operate in full duplex mode, i.e., to echo nothing.
The FULLDUPLEX command provided by NETOLS is provided because it can be provided, but its use is not recommended.
OLS is meant to be used in character at a time mode, and the user should so instruct his User Telnet.
For those users provided with only a line at a time mode, the end of line character should not be transmitted to NETOLS.
NETOLS flushes without comment all Telnet control characters it detects in the input stream.
Exceptions are LF (line feed) and NUL, which are flushed without comment.
The dialogue which logs a user onto OLS, assuming the user number of Section IV, is as followings:
ONLINE SYSTEM ENTER USER NUBMER (196)
Entries echoed by OLS are enclosed in parentheses above.
The user should substitute for 'UCSB WHITE' his own affiliation and name.
The procedure above loads the math subsystem of OLS.
To load instead either COL or NET, substitute its name for 'MOLSF'.
A simple user program can be constructed to approximate the square root of a number N using the Newton Rapshon iteration procedure, which derives the (k 1)th approximation from the kth by the following algorithm:
The following entries construct the user program: ;LIST )TYPE %ENTER N ;1 ;REAL ;LOAD ;ENTER ;STORE N ;TYPE % ENTER FIRST GUESS ;1 ;LOAD ;ENTER ;STORE X ;TYPE %# OF INTERATIONS?
;0 ;LOAD ;ENTER ;STORE N ;1 ;
/ X;  X ;/ 2 ;
STORE X ; DISP %/ X ;  X ;/ 2 ;
LIST ;STORE ;USER ;1 ;SQRT  To display the user program, enter: ;USER ;DISP ;
When executed, the program obtains from the user the number N whose square root is sought, an initial guess, and the number of iterations to be performed.
The program then computes and displays the results of each iteration, and then calls itself, permitting a second square root to be computed.
The program is executed as follows:
Entry A file of card images can be constructed with the help of the COL subsystem of OLS ard submitted as a batch job.
When execution is complete, 'printed' output can be retrieved with the following dialogue:
Text within brackets describes non ASCII characters that were part of the original document.
Please see the PDF file for the original representation.
