Abstract In the Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI), resource certificates completely obscure names or any other information that might be useful for contacting responsible parties to deal with issues of certificate expiration, maintenance, roll overs, compromises, etc.
This document describes the RPKI Ghostbusters Record containing human contact information that may be verified (indirectly) by a Certification Authority (CA) certificate.
The data in the record are those of a severely profiled vCard.
In the operational use of the RPKI, it can become necessary to contact, human to human, the party responsible for a resource holding CA certificate, AKA the certificate's maintainer, be it the holder of the certificate's private key or an administrative person in the organization, a NOC, etc.
An important example is when the operator of a prefix described by a Route Origin Authorization (ROA) sees a problem, or an impending problem, with a certificate or Certificate Revocation List (CRL) in the path between the ROA and a trust anchor.
For example, a certificate along that path has expired, is soon to expire, or a CRL associated with a CA along the path is stale, thus placing the quality of the routing of the address space described by the ROA in jeopardy.
As the names in RPKI certificates are not meaningful to humans, see [RFC6484], there is no way to use a certificate itself to lead to the worrisome certificate's or CRL's maintainer.
So, "Who you gonna call?
" This document specifies the RPKI Ghostbusters Record, an object verified via an end entity (EE) certificate, issued under a CA certificate, the maintainer of which may be contacted using the payload information in the Ghostbusters Record.
The Ghostbusters Record conforms to the syntax defined in [RFC6488].
The payload of this signed object is a severely profiled vCard.
Note that the Ghostbusters Record is not an identity certificate, but rather an attestation to the contact data made by the maintainer of the CA certificate issuing the EE certificate whose corresponding private key signs the Ghostbusters Record.
This record is not meant to supplant or be used as resource registry whois data.
It gives information about an RPKI CA certificate maintainer, not a resource holder.
The Ghostbusters Record is optional; CA certificates in the RPKI can have zero or more associated Ghostbuster Records.
Given a certificate, to find the closest Ghostbuster Record, go up until a CA certificate is reached, which may be the object itself of course.
That CA certificate will have Subject Information Access (SIA) to the publication point where all subsidiary objects (until you hit a down chain CA certificate's signed objects) are published.
The publication point will contain zero or more Ghostbuster Records.
This specification has three main sections.
The first, Section 5, is the format of the contact payload information, a severely profiled vCard.
The second, Section 6, profiles the packaging of the payload as a profile of the RPKI Signed Object Template specification [RFC6488].
The third, Section 7, describes the proper validation of the signed Ghostbusters Record.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
It is assumed that the reader understands the RPKI [RFC6480], the RPKI Repository Structure [RFC6481], Signed RPKI Objects
RPKI Ghostbusters Record Payload Example
An example of an RPKI Ghostbusters Record payload with all properties populated is as follows:
Organizational Entity ADR;TYPE WORK:;;42 Twisty Passage;Deep
TEL;TYPE FAX,WORK;VALUE uri:tel: 1 666 555 1213
The goal in profiling the vCard is not to include as much information as possible, but rather to include as few properties as possible while providing the minimal necessary data to enable one to contact the maintainer of the RPKI data that threatens the ROA[s] of concern.
The Ghostbusters vCard payload is a minimalist subset of the vCard as described in [RFC6350].
BEGIN  pro forma packaging that MUST be the first line in the vCard and MUST have the value "
VCARD" as described in [RFC6350].
VERSION  pro forma packaging that MUST be the second line in the vCard and MUST have the value "VERSION:4.0" as described in Section 3.7.9 of [RFC6350].
FN  the name, as described in Section 6.2.1 of [RFC6350], of a contactable person or role who is responsible for the CA certificate.
ORG  an organization as described in Section 6.6.4 of [RFC6350].
ADR  a postal address as described in Section 6.3 of [RFC6350].
TEL  a voice and/or fax phone as described in Section 6.4.1 of [RFC6350].
EMAIL  an Email address as described in Section 6.4.2 of [RFC6350] END  pro forma packaging that MUST be the last line in the vCard and MUST have the value "END:VCARD" as described in [RFC6350].
Per [RFC6350], the BEGIN, VERSION, FN, and END properties MUST be included in a record.
To be useful, at least one of ADR, TEL, and EMAIL MUST be included.
Other properties MUST NOT be included.
The Ghostbusters Record is a CMS signed data object conforming to the "Signed Object Template for the Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI)",
The content type of a Ghostbusters Record is defined as id ct  rpkiGhostbusters, and has the numerical value of 1.2.840.113549.1.9.16.1.35.
This OID MUST appear both within the eContentType in the encapContentInfo object as well as the content  type signed attribute in the signerInfo object.
The content of a Ghostbusters Record is described in Section 5.
Similarly to a ROA, a Ghostbusters Record is verified using an EE certificate issued by the resource holding CA certificate whose maintainer is described in the vCard.
The EE certificate used to verify the Ghostbusters Record is the one that appears in the CMS data structure that contains the payload defined above.
This EE certificate MUST describe its Internet Number Resources using the "inherit" attribute, rather than explicit description of a resource set; see [RFC3779].
The validation procedure defined in Section 3 of [RFC6488] is applied to a Ghostbusters Record.
After this procedure has been performed, the Version number type within the payload is checked, and the OCTET STRING containing the vCard data is extracted.
These data are checked against the profile defined in Section 5 of this document.
Only if all of these checks pass is the Ghostbusters payload deemed valid and made available to the application that requested the payload.
Though there is no on the wire protocol in this specification, there are attacks that could abuse the data described.
As the data, to be useful, need to be public, little can be done to avoid this exposure.
The vCards may contain real world telephone numbers, which could be abused for telemarketing, abusive calls, etc.
The vCards may contain Email addresses, which could be abused for purposes of spam.
Relying parties are hereby warned that the data in a Ghostbusters Record are self asserted.
These data have not been verified by the CA that issued the CA certificate to the entity that issued the EE certificate used to validate the Ghostbusters Record.
The IANA has registered the OID for the Ghostbusters Record in the registry created by [RFC6488] as follows:
The IANA has registered the media type application/rpki ghostbusters as follows:
None Encoding considerations: binary Security considerations: Carries an RPKI Ghostbusters Record [RFC6493].
Applications that use this media type: RPKI administrators.
Content: This media type is a signed object, as defined in [RFC6488], which contains a payload of a profiled vCard as defined above in this document.
Macintosh file type code(s): Person & email address to contact for further information:
None Author: Randy Bush <randy@psg.com
