Abstract This bibliography offers a short list of recent information resources that will help the network novice become familiar with the Internet, including its associated networks, resources, protocols, and history.
This FYI RFC includes references to free sources of information available on line as well as traditional publications.
A short section at the end includes information for accessing the on line files.
This FYI is intentionally brief so it can be easily used as a handout by user services personnel.
The following list includes a number of sources for learning about the Internet.
If you have more questions about the Internet, the best source of information is your network service provider.
For those interested in finding out about getting Internet connectivity, the books listed will help you locate a network service provider.
Items with an asterisk are available at no charge on line on the Internet see the final section for information on how to obtain these.
"Zen and the Art of the Internet: A Beginner's Guide to the Internet," (first edition)
Krol, E. and E. Hoffman.
11 p. (FYI 20, RFC 1462).
Malkin, G. and A. Marine.
"FYI on Questions and Answers: Answers to Commonly Asked 'New Internet User' Questions," 32 p.
LaQuey, Tracy with Jeanne C. Ryer.
Companion," 30 p. (on line chapters from book published by Addison Wesley) 1b.
Basic User Guides Kehoe, Brendan P. (1993)
Zen and the Art of the Internet: A Beginner's Guide, (second edition)
112 p. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
The Whole Internet User's Guide and Catalog, 400 p. O'Reilly & Assoc.
LaQuey, Tracy with Jeanne C. Ryer.
A Beginner's Guide to Global Networking, 208 p. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.
Getting Started, 318 p. SRI International,
EJ291, Menlo Park, CA 94025.
Internet services and resources   Martin, J. (1993)
"There's Gold in them thar Networks!
or Searching for Treasure in all the Wrong Places," 39 p. (RFC 1402/FYI 10).
Merit Network, Inc. (1992) "Cruise of the Internet," Merit Network Inc., Ann Arbor, MI.
(Disk based tutorial available for Macintosh or Windows).
Directory of Directories on the Internet, 175 p. Meckler, Westport, CT.
"Internet Resource Guide," NSF Network Service Center, Cambridge, MA.
Internet networks Frey, Donnalyn and Rick Adams.
:: A Directory of Electronic Mail Addressing and Networks, (second edition) 436 p. O'Reilly & Assoc.
User's Directory of Computer Networks, 653 p. Digital Press, Bedford, MA.
The Matrix: Computer Networks and Conferencing Systems Worldwide, 746 p. Digital Press, Bedford, MA.
Introducing the Internet Protocols Comer, Douglas E. (1991)
Volume I, Principles, Protocols, and Architecture, (second edition).
547 p. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ   Hedrick, Charles L. (1987)
"Introduction to the Internet Protocols," 34 p. Rutgers University Computer Science Facilities Group, Piscataway, NJ.
Lynch, Daniel C. & Marshall T. Rose (eds).
The Internet System Handbook, 822 p. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.
Further Reading   Bowers, K. L. et al.
(1990) "FYI on Where to Start:
A Bibliography of Internetworking Information," 42 p.
Malkin, G. & T. LaQuey Parker.
"Internet Users' Glossary," 53 p. (RFC 1392/FYI 18).
To find out more about accessing documents in introducing.the.internet, send electronic mail to: nis info@nic.merit.edu, with the text: send access.guide.
If you know how to use Anonymous FTP, you can get the Access Guide from one of several sites, including nic.merit.edu, nic.mr.net, ftp.nisc.sri.com, or ftp.hawaii.edu.
Check the directory introducing.the.internet for the file titled access.guide.
The Access Guide includes information about obtaining documents through dial up service using a modem for those who do not have direct Internet access.
In addition to the listed publications, many network providers publish excellent user guides and newsletters which cover Internet topics.
Contact your Internet network service provider for more information.
A longer bibliography with more comprehensive references and abstracts, FYI 3, RFC 1175 is listed above for those who may need more detailed materials.
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
