Inter Asterisk eXchange Version 2 Abstract
This document establishes the IANA registries for IAX, the Inter  Asterisk eXchange protocol, an application layer control and media protocol for creating, modifying, and terminating multimedia sessions over Internet Protocol (IP) networks.
IAX was developed by the open source community for the Asterisk PBX and is targeted primarily at Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) call control, but it can be used with streaming video or any other type of multimedia.
The IESG thinks that this work is related to IETF work done in SIP, MMUSIC, and AVT WGs, but this does not prevent publishing.
Introduction IAX (Inter Asterisk eXchange) is an "all in one" protocol for handling multimedia in IP networks.
It combines both control and media services in the same protocol.
In addition, IAX uses a single UDP data stream on a static port greatly simplifying Network Address Translation (NAT)
gateway traversal, eliminating the need for other protocols to work around NAT, and simplifying network and firewall management.
IAX employs a compact encoding that decreases bandwidth usage and is well suited for Internet telephony service.
In addition, its open nature permits new payload type additions needed to support additional services.
This document specifies and provides the initial values for the creation of the IAX related IANA registries as per [RFC5226].
The IAX protocol, as defined in [RFC5456], defines 15 namespaces that have been registered.
These namespaces are described below.
Each of these namespaces utilizes an 'Expert Review' for extension.
Documentation of new values is not mandated as RFCs.
The Expert Review should be guided by a few common sense considerations.
For example, new values should not be specific to a country, region, organization, or company; they should be well defined and widely recognized.
IAX Meta Commands Required Information for New Values: Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.1.3.2 of [RFC5456].
IAX Frame Types Required Information for New Values:
Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
In addition, the definition and description of subclasses.
: See Section 8.2 of [RFC5456].
Control Frame Subclass Registry Name:
IAX Control Frame Subclass Required Information for New Values: Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.3 of [RFC5456].
IAX Control Frames Registry Name:
IAX Control Frames Required Information for New Values: Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.4 of [RFC5456].
UNQUELCH    Resume audio/video [media] transmission
HTML Command Subclasses Registry Name:
IAX HTML Command Subclasses Required Information for New Values: Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.2 of [RFC5456].
IAX Information Elements Required Information for New Values:
Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.6 of [RFC5456].
CALLED CONTEXT   Context for number
IAX Authentication Methods Required Information for New Values: Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.6.13 of [RFC5456].
bitmask, values must be a power of two.
Dialplan Status Flags Registry Name: IAX Dialplan Status Flags Required Information for New Values: Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.6.19 of [RFC5456].
bitmask, values must be a power of two.
The following table specifies the initial assignments of IAX dialplan status flags:
IAX Calling Presentation Required Information for New Values: Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
Description: See Section 8.6.29 of [RFC5456].
Calling Type of Number (CALLINGTON)
IAX Calling Type of Number Required Information for New Values:
Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.6.30 of [RFC5456].
The values in this table are derived from Q.931; however, future values may be from other sources.
IAX Transit Network Identification Registry Name:
IAX Transit Network Identification Plan Required Information for New Values:
Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
Description: See Section 8.6.31 of [RFC5456].
The values in this table are derived from Q.931; however, future values may be from other sources.
IAX Type of Network Registry Name: IAX Type of Network Required Information for New Values:
Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.6.30 of [RFC5456].
Valid Range: 000 111 (three bits).
The values in this table are derived from Q.931, however, future values may be from other sources.
Cause Codes Registry Name: IAX Cause Codes Required Information for New Values: Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.6.30 of [RFC5456].
IAX Encryption Methods Required Information for New Values: Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.6.34 of [RFC5456].
x8000 bitmask, values must be a power of two.
IAX Media Formats Required Information for New Values:
Name, description, and relevant security considerations, if any.
: See Section 8.7 of [RFC5456].
x8000 bitmask, values must be a power of two.
This document defines IAX registries and as such does not raise security issues beyond those discussed in [RFC5456].
