Abstract The International Standard Audiovisual Number (ISAN) is a standard numbering system for the unique and international identification of audiovisual works.
This document is the definition of the formal Uniform Resource Name (URN)
Namespace Identifier (NID) for ISAN.
This document is the definition of the formal Uniform Resource Name (URN)
Namespace Identifier (NID) for ISAN.
The following template is provided in accordance with [RFC3406].
Mr. Patrick Attallah, Managing Director Declaration of structure: The identifier structure is as follows:
Where ISAN NSS is conformant to URN syntax requirements defined in [RFC2141] and is further constrained by [ISO15706] and in this document.
There are two forms, one with the version extension and one without.
The formal BNF is defined in section 2 below.
Examples of the two forms are: URN:ISAN:0123 1230 3210 2310
ISAN, its syntax, uses and its processes are defined in [ISO15706].
: Uniqueness is guaranteed by the ISAN International Agency that issues the numbers.
Numbers are not re assigned.
Persistence is guaranteed by ISO Registration Authority processes and contracts with the ISAN International Agency.
Process of identifier assignment: The details of the assignment process are defined from time to time by the ISAN International Agency.
However, in general, any approved entity can request an ISAN number by providing the required metadata information and paying the registration fee.
The ISAN International Agency may delegate to regional or market  based Registration Agencies for portions of the registration process.
Process for identifier resolution: ISAN numbers are resolved by a direct or indirect lookup with the ISAN International Agency.
At this writing, a non commercial, manual system is available online at http://www.isan.org.
The resolution procedures may be modified from time to time by the ISAN International Agency.
The ISAN NSS is unique by the nature of the ISAN International Agency's number management.
The ISAN NSS is case insensitive.
Upper and lower case characters are treated as identical.
Conformance with URN Syntax: No special considerations.
The syntax is fully conformant with [RFC2141].
Validation mechanism: The check digits provide syntax integrity.
Lookup is via online and offline services provided by the ISAN International Agency.
The following syntax specification uses an augmented Backus Naur Form (BNF) and elements defined in the URN Syntax [RFC2141].
This syntax here is derived from the syntax definition in [ISO15706], constrained to prohibit the space character as a separator.
> Note that <hex>, <upper>, <lower>, and <number> are defined in [RFC2141].
This document only defines the syntax and resolution authority for the ISAN numbers.
Details of the resolution process and the security of the assignment and resolution system processes are defined external to this document by the ISAN International Agency and thus outside the scope of this document.
Namespace Considerations ISAN is an external numbering system managed by an external agency established by ISO.
While URN namespaces may exist for which any generic numbering system can be encoded, there is currently no direct encoding for ISAN.
An example of such a namespace is the MPEG 21 system.
ISAN numbers are reserved for use in identifying audiovisual works for which there is a moving visual component, or components related to such a work (e.g. subtitling track).
The primary registrants for ISAN numbers are the producers and studios of audiovisual works (movies and television shows).
While the system is not constrained to "major" works (any bona fide entity can register any work), the primary benefits of its use come from works that are widely distributed.
The users of the ISAN system range from the studios themselves to film and video archives and libraries, rights administrators, program guide services, and audience measurement services.
Its potential for use in the Internet community is as an identifier for streaming media.
This document defines a URN NID registration that is to be entered into the IANA registry of URN NIDs.
It specifically requests the NID, "ISAN".
