Abstract This memo describes the extensions to the Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic Engineering (RSVP TE) signaling protocol to support Label Switched Paths (LSPs) in a GMPLS controlled network that includes devices using the flexible optical grid.
Introduction [G.694.1] defines the Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) frequency grids for Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) applications.
A frequency grid is a reference set of frequencies used to denote allowed nominal central frequencies that may be used for defining applications that utilize WDM transmission.
The channel spacing is the frequency spacing between two allowed nominal central frequencies.
All of the wavelengths on a fiber use different central frequencies and occupy a designated range of frequencies.
Fixed grid channel spacing is selected from 12.5 GHz, 25 GHz, 50 GHz, 100 GHz, and integer multiples of 100 GHz.
Additionally, [G.694.1] defines "flexible grids", also known as "flexi grid".
The terms "frequency slot" (i.e., the frequency range allocated to a specific channel and unavailable to other channels within a flexible grid) and "slot width" (i.e., the full width of a frequency slot in a flexible grid) are introduced in [G.694.1] to define a flexible grid.
[RFC7698] defines a framework and the associated control plane requirements for the GMPLS
based [RFC3945] control of flexi grid DWDM networks.
[RFC6163] provides a framework for GMPLS and Path Computation Element
(PCE) control of Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSONs), and [RFC7689] describes the requirements and protocol extensions for signaling to set up Label Switched Paths (LSPs) in WSONs.
This document describes the additional requirements and protocol extensions to Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic Engineering (RSVP TE)
[RFC3473] to set up LSPs in networks that support the flexi grid.
Terminology For terminology related to flexi grid, please refer to [RFC7698] and [G.694.1].
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
Requirements for Flexible Grid Signaling The architecture for establishing LSPs in a flexi grid network is described in [RFC7698].
An optical spectrum LSP occupies a specific frequency slot, i.e., a range of frequencies.
The process of computing a route and the allocation of a frequency slot is referred to as "Routing and Spectrum Assignment" (RSA).
[RFC7698] describes three architectural approaches to RSA: combined RSA, separated RSA, and distributed SA.
The first two approaches are referred to as "centralized SA", because routing (i.e., path determination) and spectrum assignment (i.e., selection of frequency slots) are both performed by a centralized entity prior to the signaling procedure.
In the case of centralized SA, the assigned frequency slot is specified in the RSVP TE Path message during LSP setup.
In the case of distributed SA, the slot width of the flexi grid LSP is specified in the Path message, allowing the network elements to select the frequency slot to be used when they process the RSVP TE messages.
If the capability to switch or convert the whole optical spectrum allocated to an optical spectrum LSP is not available at some nodes along the path of the LSP, the LSP is subject to the Optical "spectrum continuity constraint" as described in [RFC7698].
The remainder of this section states the additional requirements for signaling in a flexi grid network.
The slot width is an end to end parameter representing how much frequency resource is requested for a flexi grid LSP.
It is the equivalent of optical bandwidth, although the amount of bandwidth associated with a slot width will depend on the signal encoding.
Different LSPs may request different amounts of frequency resource in flexible grid networks, so the slot width MUST be carried in the signaling message during LSP establishment.
This enables the nodes along the LSP to know how much frequency resource has been requested (in a Path message) and how much has been allocated (by a Resv message) for the LSP.
The frequency slot information identifies which part of the frequency spectrum is allocated on each link for an LSP in a flexi grid network.
This information MUST be present in a Resv message to indicate, hop by hop, the central frequency of the allocated resource.
In combination with the slot width indicated in a Resv message (see Section 3.1), the central frequency carried in a Resv message
identifies the resources reserved for the LSP (known as the frequency slot).
The frequency slot can be represented by two parameters, as follows:
As is common with other resource identifiers (i.e., labels) in GMPLS signaling, it must be possible for the head end node, when sending a Path message, to suggest or require the central frequency to be used for the LSP.
Furthermore, for bidirectional LSPs, the Path message MUST be able to specify the central frequency to be used for reverse direction traffic.
As described in [G.694.1], the allowed frequency slots for the flexible DWDM grid have a nominal central frequency (in THz), defined by: 193.1   n   0.00625 where n is zero or a positive or negative integer.
The slot width (in GHz) is defined as: 12.5
m where m is a positive integer.
It is possible that an implementation supports only a subset of the possible slot widths and central frequencies.
For example, an implementation can be built that is 1.
limited to have a nominal central frequency granularity of 12.5 GHz, by only allowing values of n that are even, and 2.
further limited to only support slot widths of 25 GHz, by only allowing values of m that are even.
Further details can be found in [RFC7698].
This section defines the extensions to RSVP TE signaling for GMPLS [RFC3473] to support flexible grid networks.
In RSVP TE, the SENDER TSPEC object in the Path message
indicates the requested resource reservation.
The FLOWSPEC object in the Resv message indicates the actual resource reservation.
As described in Section 3.1, the slot width represents how much frequency resource is requested for a flexi grid LSP.
That is, it describes the end to end traffic profile of the LSP.
Therefore, the traffic parameters for a flexi grid LSP encode the slot width.
This document defines new Class Types (C Types) for the SENDER TSPEC and FLOWSPEC objects to carry Spectrum Switched Optical Network (SSON) traffic parameters: SSON SENDER
Class   12, C Type   8.
Class   9, C Type   8.
The SSON traffic parameters carried in both objects MUST have the format shown in Figure 1. 0
: The SSON Traffic Parameters m (16 bits): a positive integer; the slot width is specified by m   12.5 GHz.
The Reserved bits MUST be set to zero and ignored upon receipt.
4.1.1.  Applicability to Fixed Grid Networks Note that the slot width (i.e., traffic parameters) of a fixed grid defined in [G.694.1] can also be specified by using the SSON traffic parameters.
The fixed grid channel spacings (12.5 GHz, 25 GHz, 50 GHz, 100 GHz, and integer multiples of 100 GHz) are also the multiples of 12.5 GHz, so the m parameter can be used to represent these slot widths.
Therefore, it is possible to consider using the new traffic parameter object types in common signaling messages for flexi grid and legacy DWDM networks.
In the case of a flexible grid network, the labels that have been requested or allocated as signaled in the RSVP TE objects are encoded as described in [RFC7699].
This new label encoding can appear in any RSVP TE object or sub object that can carry a label.
As noted in Section 4.2 of [RFC7699], the m parameter forms part of the label as well as part of the traffic parameters.
As described in Section 4.3 of [RFC7699], a "compound label", constructed from a concatenation of the flexi grid labels, is used when signaling an LSP that uses multiple flexi grid slots.
There are no differences between the signaling procedures described for LSP control in [RFC7698] and those required for use in a fixed grid network [RFC7689].
Obviously, the TSpec, FlowSpec, and label formats described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 are used.
The signaling procedures for distributed SA and centralized SA can be applied.
Class Types for RSVP Objects
This document introduces two new Class Types for existing RSVP objects.
IANA has made the following allocations from the "Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) Parameters" registry using the "Class Names, Class Numbers, and Class Types" sub registry.
Manageability Considerations This document makes minor modifications to GMPLS signaling but does not change the manageability considerations for such networks.
Clearly, protocol analysis tools and other diagnostic aids (including logging systems and MIB modules) will need to be enhanced to support the new traffic parameters and label formats.
This document introduces no new security considerations to [RFC3473].
See also [RFC5920] for a discussion of security considerations for GMPLS signaling.
Contributors Ramon Casellas CTTC Av.
Carl Friedrich Gauss n7 Castelldefels, Barcelona  08860
Felipe Jimenez Arribas Telefonica Investigacion
y Desarrollo Emilio Vargas 6 Madrid  28045
felipej@tid.es Yi Lin Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. F3 5 B R&D Center, Huawei Base Bantian,
Haomian Zheng Huawei Technologies Email: zhenghaomian@huawei.com
