DRAFTING GROUP ON DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
T.4 STANDARDIZATION OF GROUP 3 FACSIMILE
(as amended and agreed by Working Party XIV/2)
T.4 STANDARDIZATION OF GROUP 3 FACSIMILE APPARATUS FOR  DOCUMENT
The CCITT, considering a.  that Recommendation T.2 refers to Group 1 type apparatus for  ISO  A4 document transmission over a telephone type circuit in approximately six minutes; b.  that Recommendation T.3 refers to Group 2 type apparatus for  ISO
A4 document transmission over a telephone type circuit in approximately three minutes: c.
that there is a  demand  for  Group  3  apparatus  which enables  an  ISO  A4  document  to be transmitted over a telephone type circuit in approximately one minute; d.  that for a large number of applications black and  white reproduction is sufficient; e.
that  such   a   service   may   be   requested   either alternatively   with  telephone  conversation,  or  when either or both stations are not attended; in both cases, the facsimile operation will follow Recommendation T.30, (unanimously) declares  the  view
that  Group  3  facsimile apparatus  for use on the general switched telephone network and international leased circuits  should  be  designed  and operated according to the following standards: 1.
Scanning track The  message  area
the   same direction  in  the  transmitter  and  receiver.
Viewing the message area in a vertical  plane,  the  scanning  direction should  be from left to right and subsequent scans should be adjacent and below the previous scan.
The following dimensions should be used: a.  A normal definition
standard  and  an  optional  higher definition standard of 3.85 and 7.7 line/mm respectively in vertical direction; b.  1728 black and white picture elements along the  scanned line; c.  A scanning line length of 215 mm.
may  be  employed  in  which  case the scanning density
the  correct picture proportions; d.  Input documents up to a minimum of ISO A4 size should be accepted.
Transmission time per scanning line
A total scanning line is defined as  the  sum  of  DATA bits  plus
any  required  FILL bits plus the EOL bits.
The minimum transmission times of the total scanning line should conform to the following: a.
20 milliseconds recommended standard  with  an  optional fall back to the 40 milliseconds option; b.  10  milliseconds  recognized  option  with  a  mandatory fall back to the 20 milliseconds standard; c.  5  milliseconds  recognized  option  with  a   mandatory fall back  to
option  and the 20 milliseconds standard; d.
The  identification  and   choice   of   this   minimum transmission time is to be made in the pre message (Phase B) portion  of  the  T.30  control
The   maximum transmission  time of any total scanning line should be less than 5 seconds.
length   encoding   scheme recommended for Group 3 apparatus is as follows:
A line of data is  composed  of  a  series  of  variable length  code  words.
Each  code  word represents a run length of either all white or all black.
White runs and black  runs alternate.
A total of 1728 picture elements represent one horizontal scanning line of  the  document of  standard  A4  size.
In  order  to  insure that the receiver maintains color synchronization, all DATA lines will  begin  with  a white run length code word.
If the (1728  picture elements or pels) are defined by the code words in Tables 1 and 2.
are  of  two types:  Terminating  Code  words and Make Up Code words.
Each run length is represented by either one Terminating Code  word  or  one
Code  word  followed by a Terminating Code word.
Run lengths in the range of 0 to  63  pels  are  encoded with their appropriate Terminating Code word.
Note that there is a different list of code words  for  black  and white run lengths.
Run lengths in the range of 64 to 1728 pels are  encoded first  by  the
Make  Up  Code word representing the run length which is equal to or shorter than that  required.
then  followed  by  the  Terminating Code word representing the difference  between
the  required  run length  and
the  run  length represented by the Make Up Code.
This code word follows each  line  of  DATA.
It  is  a unique  code word that can never be found within a valid line of  DATA;  therefore
,  resynchronization  after  an error burst is possible.
In addition, this signal will occur prior to  the  first DATA line of a page.
may  be  placed  in  the   message   flow   by transmitting  FILL.
FILL may be inserted between a line of DATA and an EOL, but never within  a  line  of  DATA.
Fill  must  be  added  to insure that each line of DATA, FILL, and EOL exceeds the minimum transmission time of a total   scanning  line  established  in  the  premessage control procedure.
The maximum length for a single line of  FILL  is  5  seconds,  after  which the receiver may disconnect.
Format: variable length string of 0's.
The end of  a  document  transmission  is  indicated  by sending   six  consecutive  EOL's.
Following  the  RTC Table 1a.
Make Up Black Codes Code
: It is recognized that machines exist which accommodate larger   paper
whilst  maintaining  the  standard horizontal resolution.
This option has been provided for by the addition of the Make Up Code Set defined as follows:
Extended Make Up Codes (Black and White
The identification and choice of
table  or the extended code table is to be made in the pre message
portion   of   the   T.30   control procedures.
4.2 Two dimensional coding scheme
The one dimensional coding scheme defined in 4.1 may be extended  as an option to a two dimensional scheme.
This is the subject of further study.
agreed  that  Group  3  apparatus operating  on  the  general switched telephone network shall utilize the modulation scrambler,  equalization  and  timing signals  defined  in Recommendation V.27ter, specifically in the preamble and 2, 3, 6, 7, 9 and 10.
The  data  signalling  rates  to  be  used  are
those recommended  in  Recommendation V.27ter, i.e.  4800 and 2400 bit/s.
Note 1: Some administrations pointed out that it  would  not be  possible  to  guarantee the service at a data signalling rate higher than 2400 bit/s.
arrangement of interworking between equipment conforming  to Recommendation  T.4 and these existing equipments is subject to further study.
For higher speed operation, such as may be  possible
