Abstract WHOIS output objects from registries, including both Regional Internet Registries (RIRs) and Domain Name Registries (DNRs), were collected and analyzed.
This document describes the process and results of the statistical analysis of existing WHOIS information.
The purpose of this document is to build an object inventory to facilitate discussions of data objects included in Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP) responses.
Introduction Regional Internet Registries (RIRs) and Domain Name Registries (DNRs) have historically maintained a lookup service to permit public access to some portion of the registry database.
Most registries offer the service via the WHOIS protocol [RFC3912], with additional services being offered via World Wide Web pages, bulk downloads, and other services, such as Routing Policy Specification Language (RPSL)
Although the WHOIS protocol is widely adopted and supported, it has several shortcomings that limit its usefulness to the evolving needs of the Internet community.
It has no query and response format.
It does not support user authentication or access control for differentiated access.
It has not been internationalized and thus does not consistently support Internationalized Domain Names (IDNs) as described in [RFC5890].
This document records an inventory of registry data objects to facilitate discussions of registration data objects.
The Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP) ([RFC7480], [RFC7482], [RFC7483], and [RFC7484]) was developed using this inventory as input.
In the number space, there were altogether five RIRs.
Although all RIRs provided information about IP addresses, Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs), and contacts, the data model used was different for each RIR.
In the domain name space, there were over 200 country code Top Level Domains (ccTLDs) and over 400 generic Top Level Domains (gTLDs) when this document was published.
Different Domain Name Registries may have different WHOIS response objects and formats.
A common understanding of all these data formats was critical to construct a single data model for each object.
This document describes the WHOIS data collection procedures and gives an inventory analysis of data objects based on the collected data from the five RIRs, 106 ccTLDs, and 18 gTLDs from DNRs.
The RIR data objects are classified by the five RIRs into IP address, ASN, person or contact, and the organization that held the resource.
According to SPECIFICATION 4 ("SPECIFICATION FOR REGISTRATION DATA PUBLICATION SERVICES") of the new gTLD applicant guidebook [ICANN.AGB 201206] and the Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP) ([RFC5730], [RFC5731], [RFC5732], and [RFC5733]), the DNR data objects are classified by whether they relate to the domain, contact, nameserver, or registrar.
Objects that do not belong to the categories above are viewed as privately specified objects.
In this document, there is no intent to analyze all the query and response types that exist in RIRs and DNRs.
The most common query objects are discussed, but other objects such as RPSL data structures used by Internet Routing Registries (IRRs) can be documented later if the community feels it is necessary.
The name of a specific response object.
The name given to a particular data element; it may vary between registries.
The label that is most supported by the registries.
The number of different labels.
The number of registries that support a certain data element.
3.  Methodology WHOIS information, including port 43 response and web response data, was collected between July 9, 2012, and July 20, 2012, following the procedures described below.
First, find the RIR WHOIS servers of the five RIRs, which are AFRINIC, APNIC, ARIN, LACNIC, and RIPE NCC.
All the RIRs provide information about IP addresses, ASNs, and contacts.
Query the corresponding IP addresses, ASNs, contacts, and organizations registered in the five RIRs.
Then, make a comparative analysis of the response data.
(3)  Group together the data elements that have the same meaning but use different labels.
DNR object collection process: (1)  A programming script was applied to collect port 43 response data from 294 ccTLDs. "
nic.ccTLD" was used as the query string, which is usually registered in a domain registry.
Responses for 106 ccTLDs were received.
gTLDs' port 43 response data was collected from their contracts with ICANN.
Thus, the sample size of port 43 WHOIS response data is 124 registries in total.
(2)  WHOIS data from the web was collected manually from the 124 registries that send port 43 WHOIS responses.
(3)  Some of the response that which were collected by the program did not seem to be correct, so data for the top 10 ccTLD
and .uk, was re verified by querying domain names other than "nic.ccTLD".
In accordance with SPECIFICATION 4 of the new gTLD applicant guidebook [ICANN.AGB 201206] and EPP ([RFC5730], [RFC5731], [RFC5732] and [RFC5733]), the response data objects are classified into public and other data objects.
Public data objects are those that are defined in the above references.
Other objects are those that are privately specified data elements or objects in different registries.
(5)  Data elements with the same meaning, but using different labels, were grouped together.
The number of registries that support each data element is shown in the "No. of TLDs" column.
WHOIS Data for Organizations Holding a Resource Table 1 shows the organization objects of the five RIRs.
WHOIS Data for Organizations Holding a Resource 4.2.
WHOIS Data for Contacts Table 2 shows the contact objects of the five RIRs.
WHOIS Data for Contacts 4.3.
WHOIS Data for IP Addresses Table 4 shows the IP address objects of the five RIRs.
Note: Due to the 72 character limit on line length, strings in some cells of the table are split into two or more parts, which are placed on separate lines within the same cell.
A hyphen in the final position of a string indicates that the string has been split due to the length limit.
Example of String Splitting For instance, the original strings in the cells of Table 3 are "Administrative contact", "admin c", and "abuse mailbox", respectively.
WHOIS Data for IP Addresses 4.4.
WHOIS Data for ASNs 4.5.
As can be observed, some data elements were not supported by all RIRs, and some were given different labels by different RIRs.
Also, there were identical labels used for different data elements by different RIRs.
In order to construct a single data model for each object, a selection of the most common and useful fields was made.
That initial selection was the starting point for [RFC7483].
Overview WHOIS data was collected from 124 registries, including 106 ccTLDs and 18 gTLDs.
All 124 registries support domain queries.
Among 124 registries, eight ccTLDs and 15 gTLDs support queries for specific contact persons or roles.
10 ccTLDs and 18 gTLDs support queries by nameserver.
Domain WHOIS data contain 68 data elements that use a total of 550 labels.
There is a total of 392 other objects for domain WHOIS data.
As mentioned above, public objects are those data elements selected according to the new gTLD applicant guidebook and EPP.
They are generally classified into four categories by whether they are related to the domain, contact, nameserver, or registrar.
WHOIS Data for Domains WHOIS replies about domains include "Domain Name", "Creation Date", "Domain Status", "Expiration Date", "Updated Date", "Domain ID", "DNSSEC", and "Last Transferred Date".
Table 6 gives the element name, most popular label, and the corresponding numbers of TLDs and labels.
WHOIS Data for Domains Several statistical conclusions obtained from above data are:  95.16% of the 124 registries support a "Domain Name" data element.
85.48% of the 124 registries support a "Creation Date" data element.
76.61% of the 124 registries support a "Domain Status" data element.
On the other hand, some elements such as "DNSSEC" and "Last Transferred Date" are only supported by 11.29% and 3.23% of the registries, respectively.
In the domain name space, contacts are typically divided into registrant, administrative contact, technical contact, and billing contact.
Registrant Table 7 shows all the contact information for a registrant.
14 data elements are listed below.
Among all the data elements, only "Registrant Name" is supported by more than one half of registries.
Those supported by more than one third of registries are: "Registrant Name", "Registrant Email", "Registrant ID", "Registrant Phone", "Registrant Fax", "Registrant Organization", and "Registrant Country Code".
Admin Contact Table 8 shows all the contact information for an administrative contact.
14 data elements are listed below.
Admin Contact Among all the data elements, only "Admin Street" is supported by more than one half of registries.
Those supported by more than one third of registries are: "Admin Street", "Admin Name", "Admin Email", "Admin ID", "Admin Fax", "Admin Phone", "Admin Organization", and "Admin Country Code".
Tech Contact Table 9 shows all the information for a domain name technical contact.
14 data elements are listed below.
Tech Contact Among all the data elements
, there are no elements supported by more than one half of registries.
Those supported by more than one third of registries are: "Tech Email", "Tech ID", "Tech Name", "Tech Fax", "Tech Phone", and "Tech Country Code".
Billing Contact Table 10 shows all the information for a domain name billing contact.
14 data elements are listed below.
Billing Contact Among all the data elements
, there are no elements supported by more than one half of registries.
Those supported by more than one third of registries are "Billing Name", "Billing Fax", and "Billing Email".
114 registries (about 92% of the 124 registries) have the "nameserver" data element in their WHOIS responses.
However, there are 63 different labels for this element, as shown in Table 11.
The top three labels for this element are "Name Server" (which is supported by 25% of the registries), "Name Servers" (which is supported by 16% of the registries), and "nserver" (which is supported by 12% of the registries).
Some registries have nameserver elements such like "nameserver 1", "nameserver 2" till "nameserver n".
Thus, there are more labels than of other data elements.
There are three data elements about registrar information.
WHOIS Data for Registrars 67.7% of the registries have the "Sponsoring Registrar" data element.
The elements "Created by Registrar" and "Updated by Registrar" are supported by 11.3% and 8.9% of the registries, respectively.
So called "other objects" are those data elements that are privately specified or are difficult to be classified.
There are 392 other objects altogether.
Table 13 lists the top 50 other objects found during data collection.
The Top 50 Other Objects
Some registries returned things that looked like labels, but were not.
For example, in this reply: Registrant: Name:
"Name" and "Email" appeared to be data elements, but "Registrant" did not.
The inventory work proceeded on that assumption, i.e., there were two data elements to be recorded in this example.
Some other data elements, like "Remarks", "anniversary", and "Customer service Contact", are designed particularly for their own purpose by different registries.
Some preliminary conclusions could be drawn from the raw data.
All of the 124 domain registries have the object names in their responses, although they are in various formats.
Of the 118 WHOIS services contacted, 65 registries show their registrant contact.
About half of the registries (60 registries) support admin contact information.
There are 47 registries, which is about one third of the total number, that have technical and billing contact information.
Only seven of the 124 registries give their abuse email in a "remarks" section.
No explicit abuse contact information is provided.
There are mainly two presentation formats.
One is key value; the other is data block format.
Example of key value format: Domain Information Query:
Delegated Created: 17 Apr 2004
14 Nov 2010 Expires: 31 Dec 9999
Example of data block format: WHOIS database domain nic.example.org Domain Name
a   198.51.100.10 Contact details Registrant, Technical Contact, Billing Contact, Admin.
Contact AdamsNames Reserved Domains (i)
These domains are not available for registration
United Kingdom Identifier: test123 Servidor WHOIS de NIC Example Este servidor contiene informacion autoritativa exclusivamente de dominios nic.example.org Cualquier consulta sobre este servicio, puede hacerla al correo
electronico whois@nic.example.org Titular: John (nic.example.org)
Veracruz con calle Cali, Edif Aguila, Urb.
Las Mercedes Caracas, Distrito Capital VE 0212
11 registries give local script responses.
The WHOIS information of other registries are all represented in English.
The top 10 data elements are listed in Table 14.
The Top 10 Data Elements
Most of the domain related WHOIS information is included in the top 10 data elements.
Other information like name server and registrar name is also supported by most registries.
A cumulative distribution analysis of all the data elements was done.
(1)  About 5% of the data elements discovered by the inventory work are supported by 111 registries (i.e., 90%).
(2)  About 30% of the data elements discovered by the inventory work are supported by 44 registries (i.e., 35%).
(3)  About 60% of the data elements discovered by the inventory work are supported by 32 registries (i.e., 26%).
(4)  About 90% of the data elements discovered by the inventory work are supported by 14 registries (i.e., 11%).
From the above result, it is clear that only a few registries support all the public objects, most of the registries support just some of the objects.
The top 10 labels of different data elements are listed in Table 15.
As explained above, the "Name Server" label is a unique example because many registries define the name server elements from "nameserver 1" through "nameserver n".
Thus, the count of labels for name servers is much higher than other elements.
Data elements representing dates and street addresses were also common.
A cumulative distribution analysis of label numbers was done.
About 90% of data elements have more than two labels.
It is therefore necessary to specify a standard and unified format for object names in a WHOIS response.
The results indicate that there are 392 other data objects in total that are not easy to be classified or are privately defined by various registries.
The top 50 other objects are listed in Table 13 in Section 5.3.
It is clear that various different objects are designed for some particular purpose.
In order to ensure uniqueness of JSON names used in the RDAP service, establishment of an IANA registry is advised.
This section lists the limitations of the survey and some assumptions that were made in the execution of this work.
The input "nic.ccTLD" may not be a good choice, for the term "nic" is often specially used by the corresponding ccTLD, so the collected WHOIS data may be customized and different from the common data.
Since the programming script queried the "nic.ccTLD" in an anonymous way, only the public WHOIS data from WHOIS servers having nic.ccTLD were collected.
So, the private WHOIS data were not covered by this document.
11 registries did not provide responses in English.
The classification of data elements within their responses may not be accurate.
The extension data elements are used randomly by different registries.
It is difficult to do statistical analysis.
Sample sizes of contact, name server, and registrar queries are small.
Only WHOIS queries for contact ID, nameserver, and registrar were used.
Some registries may not support contact, name server, or registrar queries.
Some may not support query contact by ID.
Contact information of some registries may be protected.
There are some objects that are included in the existing WHOIS system but not mentioned in [RFC7483].
This document is intended to give a list of reference extension objects for discussion.
RIR Reference Extension Objects  company the company name registered by the registrant.
maintainer authentication information that identifies who can modify the contents of this object.
list of resources a list of IPv4 addresses, IPv6 addresses, and Autonomous System numbers.
referral NOC contact the Network Operations Center contact.
The following objects are selected from the top 50 other objects in Section 5.3 that are supported by more than five registries.
These objects are considered as possible extension objects.
The identifier of a 'role' object with authority over a zone.
maintainer authentication information that identifies who can modify the contents of this object.
Registration URL typically the website address of a registry.
anonymous whether the registration information is anonymous or not.
hold whether the domain is "on hold" or not.
obsoleted whether a domain is obsoleted or not.
Customer Service Contact a kind of contact.
This document does not provide any security services or introduce additional considerations to those discussed in [RFC7481].
