Abstract This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in TCP/IP based internets.
In particular, it defines objects for managing the the interface attributes defined in the Guaranteed Service of the Integrated Services Model.
Comments should be made to the Integrated Services Working Group, intserv@isi.edu. 1.
The SNMPv2 Network Management Framework
Network Management Framework consists of four major components.
STD 17, RFC 1213 defines MIB II, the core set of managed objects for the Internet suite of protocols.
RFC 1445 which defines the administrative and other architectural aspects of the framework.
RFC 1448 which defines the protocol used for network access to managed objects.
The Framework permits new objects to be defined for the purpose of experimentation and evaluation.
Object Definitions Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed the Management Information Base or MIB.
Objects in the MIB are defined using the subset of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) defined in the SMI.
In particular, each object type is named by an OBJECT IDENTIFIER, an administratively assigned name.
The object type together with an object instance serves to uniquely identify a specific instantiation of the object.
For human convenience, we often use a textual string, termed the descriptor, to refer to the object type.
Several new data types are introduced as a textual convention in this MIB document.
These textual conventions enhance the readability of the specification and can ease comparison with other specifications if appropriate.
It should be noted that the introduction of the these textual conventions has no effect on either the syntax nor the semantics of any managed objects.
The use of these is merely an artifact of the explanatory method used.
Objects defined in terms of one of these methods are always encoded by means of the rules that define the primitive type.
Hence, no changes to the SMI or the SNMP are necessary to accommodate these textual conventions which are adopted merely for the convenience of readers and writers in pursuit of the elusive goal of clear, concise, and unambiguous MIB documents.
Definitions INTEGRATED SERVICES GUARANTEED MIB DEFINITIONS ::
intSrvGuaranteed MODULE IDENTITY LAST UPDATED "9511030500Z"
Thu Aug 28 09:04:22 PDT 1997 ORGANIZATION "IETF Integrated Services Working Group" CONTACT INFO "
Cisco Systems 519 Lado Drive Santa Barbara, California 93111
The attributes of the system's interfaces  ex  ported by the Guaranteed Service."
The Backlog  parameter  is  the  data  backlog resulting  from  the vagaries of how a specific implementation deviates from a  strict  bit by  bit  service.
So, for instance, for packetized weighted fair queueing, Backlog is set  to  the Maximum Packet Size.
The Backlog term is measured in units of bytes.
An  individual  element can advertise a Backlog value between 1 and 2  28 (a  little  over  250 megabytes)  and  the  total added over all ele  ments can range as high as
Should the  sum of the different elements delay exceed (
each  service  element should  be  set  to the maximum packet transfer delay (independent of bucket size) through  the service  element.
For  instance,  in a simple router, one might compute the worst case amount of  time
it  make  take  for a datagram to get through the input interface to  the  processor, and how long it would take to get from the pro  cessor to the outbound interface (assuming  the queueing
For an Eth  ernet, it might represent the worst case  delay if  the maximum number of collisions is experi  enced.
The Delay term is measured in units of one  mi  crosecond.
An individual element can advertise a delay value between  1  and  2  28  (somewhat over two minutes) and the total delay added all elements  can  range  as  high  as   (2  32) 1.
Should  the sum of the different elements delay exceed (
"If a network element uses a certain amount  of slack,  Si,  to  reduce the amount of resources that it has reserved for a particular flow,  i, the  value
Si  should be stored at the network element.
i, the network element must use the same slack
Si without  any further computation.
This guarantees consisten  cy in the reservation process.
As an example for the use of  the  slack  term, consider the case where the required end to end delay, Dreq, is larger than the  maximum  delay of the fluid flow system.
In this, Ctot is the sum of the Backlog terms end to end,  and
Dtot is the sum of the delay terms end to end.
Dreq is obtained by setting R r in the  fluid  delay formula, and is given by b/r   Ctot/r   Dtot.
In this case the slack term is S   Dreq (b/r   Ctot/r   Dtot).
The slack term may be used by the network  ele
ments  to  adjust  their local reservations, so that they can admit flows that would  otherwise have been rejected.
A service element at an in  termediate network element that can  internally differentiate between delay and rate guarantees can now take advantage of this  information  to lower the amount of resources allocated to this flow.
For example, by taking an amount of slack s
<  S, an RCSD scheduler [5] can increase the local delay bound, d, assigned to the flow,  to d s.
Given an RSpec, (Rin, Sin), it would do so by setting
Sin s. Similarly,  a  network  element  using  a   WFQ scheduler  can  decrease  its local reservation from Rin to Rout by using some of the slack  in the  RSpec.
This  can be accomplished by using the transformation rules given in the  previous section,  that ensure that the reduced reserva  tion level will not increase the  overall  end  to end delay."
MODULE COMPLIANCE STATUS  current DESCRIPTION
The compliance statement " MODULE
"These objects are required  for  Systems  sup  porting the Guaranteed Service of the Integrat  ed Services Architecture."
The use of an SNMP SET results in an RSVP or Integrated Services reservation under rules that are different compared to if the reservation was negotiated using RSVP.
However, no other security considerations exist other than those imposed by SNMP itself.
