Abstract This document updates the definitions of IPv6 multicast scopes and therefore updates RFCs 4007 and 4291.
[RFC4291] defines "scop" as "a 4 bit multicast scope value used to limit the scope of the multicast group" and defines "scop 3" as "reserved".
The multicast protocol specification in [MPL] desires to use multicast scop 3 to transport multicast traffic scoped to a network of nodes connected in a mesh.
This scop value is used to accommodate a multicast scope that is greater than Link Local but is also automatically determined by the network architecture.
Definition of IPv6 Multicast Address Scopes (Updates RFC 4291)
The following change is applied to Section 2.7 of [RFC4291].
Admin Local scope is the smallest scope that must be administratively configured, i.e., not automatically derived from physical connectivity or other, non multicast related configuration.
Interface Local, Link Local, and Realm Local scope boundaries are automatically derived from physical connectivity or other non  multicast related configurations.
Global scope has no boundary.
The boundaries of all other non reserved scopes of Admin Local or larger are administratively configured.
For reserved scopes, the way of configuring their boundaries will be defined when the semantics of the scope are defined.
[RFC4007], the zone of a Realm Local scope must fall within zones of larger scope.
Because the zone of a Realm Local scope is configured automatically while the zones of larger scopes are configured manually, care must be taken in the definition of those larger scopes to ensure that the inclusion constraint is met.
Realm Local scopes created by different network technologies are considered to be independent and will have different zone indices (see Section 6 of [RFC4007]).
A router with interfaces on links using different network technologies does not forward traffic between the Realm Local multicast scopes defined by those technologies.
Definition of Realm Local Scopes
The definition of any Realm Local scope for a particular network technology should be published in an RFC.
For example, such a scope definition would be appropriate for publication in an "IPv6 over foo" RFC.
Any RFCs that include the definition of a Realm Local scope will be added to the IANA "IPv6 Multicast Address Scopes" registry under the Realm Local scope entry, and those specifications must include such a request in their IANA Considerations.
Section 5 of this document gives the definition of scop 3 for IEEE 802.15.4
Definition of Automatic and Administratively Configured Scopes (Updates RFC 4007)
Section 5 of RFC 4007
[RFC4007] and Section 2.7 of RFC 4291
[RFC4291] disagree on the way in which multicast scop 3 is configured.
To resolve that disagreement, the last bullet in the list in Section 5 of [RFC4007] is updated as follows:
The boundaries of zones of a scope other than interface local, link local, and global must be defined and configured by network administrators.
The boundaries of zones of a scope are defined by the IPv6 addressing architecture [RFC4291] and updated by RFC 7346.
Definition of Realm Local Scope for IEEE 802.15.4
When used in an IP over IEEE802.15.4 network, scop 3 is defined to include all interfaces sharing a Personal Area Network Identifier (PAN ID).
IANA Considerations IANA has established a sub registry titled "IPv6 Multicast Address Scopes" in the existing "IPv6 Multicast Address Space Registry".
The new registry has been populated with the scop values given in Section 2.
New definitions for scop values will be made following the "IETF Review" policy [RFC5226].
For each future RFC that defines a Realm Local scope for new network technologies (scop 3), IANA will add a reference to the defining document in the "IPv6 Multicast Address Scopes" registry.
Such RFCs are expected to make an explicit request to IANA for inclusion in the registry.
IANA has included a note on the top of the "IPv6 Multicast Address Scopes" registry: The definition of any Realm Local scope for a particular network technology should be published in an RFC.
For example, such a scope definition would be appropriate for publication in an 'IPv6  over foo' RFC.
Any RFCs that define a Realm Local scope will be listed in this registry as an additional reference in the Realm Local scope entry.
Such RFCs are expected to make an explicit request to IANA for inclusion in this registry.
This document has no security considerations beyond those in RFC 4007
[RFC4007] and RFC 4291 [RFC4291].
