Abstract This RFC is meant to represent a guideline by which the IETF conferences may run more effeciently with regards to identification and security protocols, with specific attention paid to a particular sub group within the IETF: "facial hairius extremis".
This document will shed further illumination on these problems and provide some possible solutions.
This memo provides entertainment for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind, but is rather unstandard, actually.
Please laugh loud and hard.
It has come to the attention of THEY [1] that a certain "facial hairius extremesis" of the male variety of the species "homo sapien" of the sub culture "computeris extrordinarisis" have overrun the IETF conferences and thus led to the break down of many identification and safety protocols.
While collecting research about the sub group "facial hairius extremis" (FHE), it was noted that the per capita appearance of FHEs at IETFs was largely disproportional with the existence of FHEs in the world at large.
In fact, the existence of facial hair at all within the IETF community is extraordinarily common among the males of the group.
Apart from ZZ Top and WWF Wrestling, it is not possible to find more facial hair within any occupational group.
In this author's own experience the average amount of men with long term facial hair is less than 20%.
Long term versus short term facial hair is a very important distinction as short term facial hair, also known as the temporary illness "goatee universitis" (which symptoms range from full goatees to the less popular chin goatee) is a common affliction for university based males.
facial hair can go as high as 40%.
However, among the males of the IETF the per capita long term facial hair is as high as 60% [2].
Ordinarily, this abundance of long term FHE would not require that an RFC be written.
However, increasingly there have been issues regarding mistaken identification.
For security purposes as well as ease of identification, this RFC will serve to clarify these issues and hopefully provide a solution for them.
Mistaken Identification Syndrome (or "Are you  jon.
or Scott?") I was speaking to a very well known network researcher, I'll call him  jon., who tells me that he is often mistaken for a SOBbing Harvard person.
jon. says, "People tell someone to look for me or him and say that I'm about so tall with a big white beard, and suddenly people are coming up to me and saying, 'Hi Scott'
and he often tells me that he is mistakenly hailed as, ' jon.'.
Often the mistake is made solely on the appearance of our facial hair."
told me is that once a woman called looking for a computer researcher but only having a first name and physical description.
The receiptionist asked for the description and the woman said she was looking for an older Caucasian man with a beard.
On a more personal note, two researchers who were both employed at USC/ISI shaved their very famous facial hair and were both unrecognizable to friends and co workers alike.
If it weren't for B.M.'s Grateful Dead T shirts and lack of shoes, or R.V.M.'s voice I would have never recognized them.
It is obvious to this researcher that facial hair of any variety is a very recognizable characteristic.
Indeed, when giving a description of a male who has facial hair, it is always one of the first characteristics given.
Ordinarily this would not be a problem, since facial hair in the world at large is below 20%.
However, when used as a description at IETFs, disaster can insue.
There are two parts to my proposed solution: the role of the seeker and the role of the FHE.
For those who are seeking a FHE of known identity:  It is important to recognize these men as individuals.
Just because a man has the facial hair you are looking for, please stop to inquire if you have the correct person.
Think of what a blow
it is to a person's ego to be constantly misidentified, and think of how annoying it is to be hailed by someone across a crowded IETF room
and they are yelling the WRONG NAME.
So remember to look, identify, and ask BEFORE you begin rambling on about some Internet stuff.
For the FHE:  Give proper signals when being sought.
If someone mistakenly calls you the wrong name, do not lose heart.
Count to 10 and commonly reply, "You must have mistaken me for so
and so, I am not that person.", and walk away.
Also, if someone calls you from across a room, raise your your arm, smile and wave vigorously in affirmation or raise your arm, shake your head and give them a sign that you are not who they are looking for.
As an FHE it is part of your responsibility to understand that facial hair is an extremely identifiable physical characteristic.
Understand that non FHE people do not mean any harm.
In closing, I hope you found this RFC worthwhile and that it raised some interesting points.
I also hope that I was able to further the cause of FHE and to make everyone's life a little bit easier.
