Abstract This document defines a new type of a BGP extended community, which carries a 4 octet Autonomous System (AS) number.
This document defines a new type of BGP extended community [RFC4360]: a 4 octet AS specific extended community.
This type of extended community is similar to the 2 octet AS specific extended community, except that it can carry a 4 octet Autonomous System number.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
4 Octet AS Specific Extended Community
This is an extended type with a Type field comprising 2 octets and a Value field comprising 6 octets. 0
The value of the high order octet of this extended type is either 0x02 (for transitive communities) or 0x42 (for non transitive communities).
The low order octet of this extended type is used to indicate sub types.
The Value field consists of 2 sub fields: Global Administrator sub field: 4 octets This sub field contains a 4 octet Autonomous System number assigned by IANA.
Local Administrator sub field: 2 octets
The organization identified by the Autonomous System number in the Global Administrator sub field can encode any information in this sub field.
The format and meaning of the value encoded in this sub field should be defined by the sub type of the community.
Considerations for 2 Octet Autonomous Systems
As per [RFC4893], a 2 octet Autonomous System number can be converted into a 4 octet Autonomous System number by setting the 2 high order octets of the 4 octet field to zero.
As a consequence, at least in principle, an Autonomous System that uses a 2 octet Autonomous System number could use either 2 octet or 4 octet AS specific extended communities.
This is undesirable, as both communities would be treated as different, even if they had the same Sub Type and Local Administrator values.
Therefore, for backward compatibility with existing deployments and to avoid inconsistencies between 2 octet and 4 octet specific extended communities, Autonomous Systems that use 2 octet Autonomous System numbers SHOULD use 2 octet AS specific extended communities rather than 4 octet AS specific extended communities.
This document defines a class of extended communities, called 4 octet AS specific extended communities, for which the IANA has created and will maintain a registry entitled Four octet AS Specific Extended Community.
All the communities in this class are of extended Types.
Future assignments are to be made using the "First Come First Served" policy defined in [RFC5226].
The Type values for the transitive communities of the 4 octet AS specific extended community class are 0x0200 0x02ff; for the non transitive communities of that class, they are 0x4200 0x42ff.
Assignments consist of a name and the value.
This document does not add new security issues.
All the security considerations for BGP extended communities apply here.
At the time that this document was written, there were significant efforts underway to improve the security properties of BGP.
For examples of documents that have been produced up to this time of publication, see [RFC4593] and [SIDR].
There is a potential serious issue if a malformed, optional transitive attribute is received.
This issue and the steps to avoid it are discussed in [OPT TRANS].
