Abstract A Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) server can experience temporary overload because one or more clients are sending requests to the server at a higher rate than the server is capable or willing to handle.
This document defines a new CoAP response code for a server to indicate that a client should reduce the rate of requests.
The Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)
[RFC7252] response codes are used by a CoAP server to indicate the result of an attempt to understand and satisfy a request sent by a client.
CoAP response codes are similar to the HTTP [RFC7230] status codes, and many codes are shared with similar semantics by both CoAP and HTTP.
HTTP has the code "429" registered for "Too Many Requests" [RFC6585].
This document registers a CoAP response code "4.29" for similar purposes and uses the Max Age option (see Section 5.10.5 of [RFC7252]) to indicate a back off period after which a client can try the request again.
While a server may not be able to respond to one kind of request, it may be able to respond to a request of a different kind, even from the same client.
Therefore, the back off period applies only to similar requests.
For the purpose of this response code, a request is similar if it has the same method and Request URI.
Also, if a client is sending a sequence of requests that are part of the same series (e.g., a set of measurements to be processed by the server), they can be considered similar even if request URIs are different.
Because request similarity is context dependent, it is up to the application logic to decide how the similarity of the requests should be evaluated.
The 4.29 code is similar to the 5.03 "Service Unavailable" [RFC7252] code in that the 5.03 code can also be used by a server to signal an overload situation.
The 5.03 code also uses the Max Age option to indicate the time after which a client can retry.
However, the 4.29 code indicates that the too frequent requests from the requesting client are the reason for the overload.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
Readers should also be familiar with the terms and concepts discussed in [RFC7252].
If a CoAP server is unable to serve a client that is sending CoAP request messages more often than the server is capable or willing to handle, the server SHOULD respond to the request(s) with the response code 4.29, "Too Many Requests".
The Max Age option is used to indicate the number of seconds after which the server assumes it is OK for the client to retry the request.
An action result payload (see Section 5.5.1 of [RFC7252]) can be sent by the server to give more guidance to the client, e.g., details of the overload situation.
The 4.29 response code is only returned to
sending requests too frequently; if other clients are sending requests that cannot be served due to server overload, the 5.03 response code is more appropriate.
If a client repeats a request that was answered with 4.29 before Max Age time has passed, it is possible that the client sent multiple requests before receiving the first answer or that the client did not recognize the response code.
To slow down clients that do not recognize the 4.29 code, the server MAY respond with a more generic error code (e.g., 5.03).
The server SHOULD rate limit 4.29 replies taking into account its usual load shedding policies.
However, any such method that adds per client state to the server may be counterproductive to reducing the load.
If a client receives the 4.29 response code from a CoAP server to a request, it SHOULD NOT send a similar request to the server before the time indicated in the Max Age option has passed.
If the 4.29 response does not contain a Max Age option, the default value (60 seconds, as defined in Section 5.10.5 of [RFC7252]) is assumed.
Note that a client may receive a 4.29 response code on a first request to a server.
This can happen, for example, if there is a proxy on the path and the server replies based on the load from multiple clients aggregated by the proxy, or if a client has restarted recently and does not remember its recent requests.
A client should not rely on a server being able to send the 4.29 response code in an overload situation because an overloaded server may not be able to reply at all to some requests.
Security Considerations Security considerations of [RFC7252] apply to this response code also.
Replying to CoAP requests with a response code consumes resources from a server.
For a server under attack, it may be more appropriate to simply drop requests without responding at all.
However, dropping requests is also likely to cause well behaving clients to simply retry the requests.
As with any other CoAP reply, a client should trust this response code only to the extent that it trusts the underlying security mechanisms (e.g., DTLS [RFC6347]) for authentication and freshness.
If a CoAP reply with the "Too Many Requests" response code is not authenticated and integrity protected, an attacker can attempt to spoof a reply and make the client wait for an extended period of time before trying again.
If the response code is sent without encryption, it may leak information about the server overload situation and client traffic patterns.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the following response code in the "CoAP Response Codes" subregistry within the "Constrained RESTful Environments (CoRE) Parameters" registry:  Response Code: 4.29  Description: Too Many Requests
RFC 8516 IANA has added this document as an additional reference for the Max Age option in the "CoAP Option Numbers" subregistry.
