Abstract Every version of the FTP specification has added a few new commands, with the early ones summarized in RFC 959.
RFC 2389 established a mechanism for specifying and negotiating FTP extensions.
The number of extensions, both those supported by the mechanism and some that are not, continues to increase.
An IANA registry of FTP Command and Feature names is established to reduce the likelihood of conflict of names and the consequent ambiguity.
This specification establishes that registry.
Every version of the FTP specification has added a few new commands, with the early ones summarized in RFC 959 [RFC0959].
[RFC2389] established a mechanism for specifying and negotiating extensions to the FTP protocol specified in RFC 959, by means of "FEAT Strings" identifying extensions supported by the FTP server, and sent in response to a "FEAT" command.
The number of extensions continues to grow, not all of them supported by FEAT.
An IANA registry is established to reduce the likelihood of a conflict of names and the consequent ambiguity and to encourage the sharing of information.
This specification establishes that registry.
The name of this registry is "FTP Commands and Extensions".
As specified in this RFC, IANA has established a registry for FTP commands and extensions.
Registration requests and registry entries should include the following:
The FTP command, either new or modified, used in the extension or with which the extension is used.
Following the long standing practice to capitalize command names in specification documents for FTP, the command names are entered in all uppercase.
However, if an extension affects the overall command parameter handling and/or transaction processing, instead of being bound to one command (or a small number of commands), the string " N/A " is entered.
The name of the extension.
FTP extensions predating RFC 2389 [RFC2389], and some extensions published after it, did not specify a keyword to identify the extension in a FEAT response.
Some later specifications established FEAT strings with the respective command names as their keywords.
In order to provide for keywords for future specifications in such cases, this document establishes 'placeholder' keywords to reserve reasonable feature names for future standardization.
Similarly, placeholder keywords are used for the basic FTP commands specified in RFC 959 [RFC0959] and those of its predecessors that are still in use.
These placeholder keywords are placed in the registry for convenience; it is not intended that they be returned in FEAT responses.
To compensate for this idiosyncrasy, the column in the registry is entitled "FEAT Code", and to clearly distinguish between the two cases, defined FEAT keywords codes are listed in all uppercase, whereas placeholder keywords (henceforth called "pseudo FEAT codes") are listed in lowercase.
Future specifications are allowed to "upgrade" a placeholder to a true keyword unless it is specifically declared 'immutable' below, but otherwise IANA maintains uniqueness of feature names (FEAT codes) based on case  insensitive comparison.
Description  A brief description of the extension and, where appropriate, the command.
FEAT String  (optional in registration requests to IANA)
The string expected to be included in the response to the FEAT command [RFC2389] if the extension is supported.
In many cases, the FEAT string required to identify an extension only consists of the "FEAT Code", making this item redundant.
Therefore, this item should only be specified if it is intended to register a FEAT string that contains mandatory elements other than the "FEAT Code" itself.
Due to space restrictions, and to allow registrants to provide additional information, IANA should present these registration items (if given) in numbered footnotes to the table, not in an additional table column.
The type (or 'kind') of the command.
Section 4.1 of RFC 959 [RFC0959] introduced a subdivision of FTP commands into three types: Access control, transfer Parameter {setting}, and Service {execution}.
For clarity, and as a service to the user of the registry, this subdivision is extended to all registered FTP commands, using the characteristic initial of the type, 'a', 'p', or 's', respectively, filed in the registry column titled "type"; combinations are allowed, e.g., 'p/s'.
The support expectation for the command.
RFC 959 specifies mandatory to implement commands and optional commands.
This classification is carried over to all registered commands, using a column titled "conf" carrying a single character
either 'm' or 'o', for "mandatory" and "optional", respectively.
Similarly, obsoleted or historic entries are left in the registry to avoid conflicts with deployed implementations, and these entries are marked with 'h' (for "historic").
Beyond the initial registrations, Standards Action [RFC5226] is needed to register new "mandatory" entries or to move such entries to "historic".
A reference to an RFC or other definition of the extension and/or to implementations supporting it (see the next section).
This registry is primarily intended to avoid conflicting uses of the same extension names and command keywords for different purposes, not to demonstrate that an extension is somehow "approved".
The "Expert Review" method will be used, but the designated expert is expected to check only that at least one of the two criteria that follow are met.
The extension is documented in a permanent and readily available public specification (this is the same as the "Specification Required" registration policy defined in RFC 5226 [RFC5226]).
The extension is actually implemented in FTP client and server systems that are generally available (not necessarily either free or unencumbered, but available).
For an extension or command to be marked "mandatory" ('m' in the "conf" column), an IETF Standards Track specification is required.
An IESG Standards Action is allowed to direct IANA to change the Conformance Requirements listed for any entry.
The following commands are part of the base FTP specification [RFC0959] and are listed in the registry with the immutable pseudo FEAT code "base".
Mandatory commands: ABOR, ACCT, ALLO, APPE, CWD, DELE, HELP, LIST, MODE, NLST, NOOP, PASS, PASV, PORT, QUIT, REIN, REST, RETR, RNFR, RNTO, SITE, STAT, STOR, STRU, TYPE, USER Optional commands: CDUP, MKD, PWD, RMD, SMNT, STOU
STD 3 [RFC1123] clarified and updated the status and implementation requirements of these standard FTP commands, and it contains important complementary information for the following commands: LIST, NLST, PASV, REST, SITE, STOU 2.5.
The following commands were specified as experimental in an extension to an early version of the FTP specification [RFC0775] but later deprecated by RFC 1123 [RFC1123], because Standard FTP [RFC0959] specifies their standard successors.
They are listed in the registry with the immutable pseudo FEAT code "hist".
XCUP, XCWD, XMKD, XPWD, XRMD Implementation note:
Deployed FTP clients still make use of the deprecated commands and most FTP servers support them as aliases for the standard commands.
The following commands were specified as part of the "FOOBAR" IPng effort in RFC 1545
later, RFC 1639 [RFC1639] and are now obsolete.
They are listed in the registry with the immutable pseudo FEAT code "hist".
As a service to users of the registry and the authors of existing specifications, all FTP commands and features published in RFCs after STD 3 [RFC1123] and up to the time of this writing were included in the registry upon creation.
The following pseudo FEAT codes have been assigned, according to Section 2: base FTP standard commands [RFC0959]
hist Historic experimental commands [RFC0775], [RFC1639]
secu FTP Security Extensions [RFC2228] feat FTP Feature Negotiation
While an IETF Standards Action would be required to make the FEAT mechanism [RFC2389]
mandatory, implementation of that extension mechanism is clearly required in conjunction with any extension or feature that depends on it.
#2 FEAT String for [RFC4217]:
TLS FEAT String for [RFC2773]:
AUTH KEA SKIPJACK #3 FEAT String:
TYPE {semicolon separated list of supported types} 5.
IANA Considerations IANA has established the registry described in Section 2 using the initial content specified in Section 3 and including the body of Sections 2.4 and 2.5 as explanatory text in the preface of the registry.
New entries should be added to this registry when extensions to FTP are approved or defined in RFCs or when extensions that are already in use and well documented are identified.
In other words, the requirement for registration is a slightly relaxed version of "Specification Required" [RFC5226] with Expert Review.
See Section 2.3 for specifics and exceptions.
The creation of this registry provides improved documentation and protection against interoperability problems.
It introduces no new security issues.
