Abstract When the Curdle Security Working Group was chartered, a range of object identifiers was donated by DigiCert, Inc. for the purpose of registering the Edwards Elliptic Curve key agreement and signature algorithms.
This donated set of OIDs allowed for shorter values than would be possible using the existing S/MIME or PKIX arcs.
This document describes the donated range and the identifiers that were assigned from that range, transfers control of that range to IANA, and establishes IANA allocation policies for any future assignments within that range.
When the Curdle Security Working Group was chartered, a range of object identifiers was donated to the working group by DigiCert,
Inc. The use of these object identifiers allowed for the Edwards Elliptic Curve key agreement [RFC7748] and signature [RFC8032] algorithms to be defined with encodings that are smaller than similar ones would be if assigned from the existing S/MIME or PKIX arcs.
The initial registrations from this arc were made while developing [RFC8410].
After those registrations were made, there were still some unused values that could be used by other security groups.
Object identifiers are primarily used with Abstract Syntax Notation (ASN.1) [ASN.1].
The ASN.1 specifications continue to evolve, but object identifiers can be used with any and all versions of ASN.1.
This document describes the object identifiers that were assigned in that donated range, transfers control of the range to IANA, and establishes IANA allocation policies for any future assignments.
The donated range from DigiCert, Inc. is as follows:
first: { iso (1) identified organization (3) thawte (101) 100 } last: { iso (1) identified organization (3) thawte (101) 127 } 2.
IANA Considerations IANA has created the "SMI Security for Cryptographic Algorithms" registry within the SMI numbers registry.
The new registry has three columns, as shown below.
SMI Security for Cryptographic Algorithms
The registration policy is "Specification Required" as defined in [RFC8126].
The column 'Decimal' is required to be a number between 100 and 127 inclusive.
The value of 100 has been reserved so that a new arc below that point can be established in the future (i.e., starting at 1.3.101.100.1).
If the new child registry is established, a name for this value is to be assigned at that point.
The experts can, at their discretion, assign an algorithm OID instead.
This document populates an IANA registry, and it raises no new security considerations.
The protocols that specify these values include the security considerations associated with their usage.
