Abstract This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace that is managed by SWIFT for usage within messages standardized by SWIFT.
Introduction SWIFT is an industry owned cooperative supplying secure, standardised messaging services and interface software to over 7,500 financial institutions in 199 countries.
The SWIFT community includes banks, broker/dealers and investment managers, as well as their market infrastructures in payments, securities, treasury and trade.
The goal of this namespace is to ensure the stability and uniqueness of the names of various items that are used within the messages exchanged between financial institutions.
SWIFT is one of the principal standardization bodies for financial messages and services.
This standardization process identifies the structure and meaning of messages exchanged for various financial services offered by financial institutions.
It is essential that names of items (such as the XML schema describing the message itself) can be used to identify the resource even years after the message has been exchanged.
The same resource may exist in multiple physical locations, and thus multiple URL's, but only a single URN. 2.
"swift" Registration Information: Version 1 Date: 2001
08 01 Declared registrant of the namespace:
1 B 1310 La Hulpe Belgium Declaration of syntactic structures:
The structure of the Namespace Specific String is a flat space <URN chars> [1] which have no knowable structure outside of the context of the SWIFT community internal resolver.
Future changes to the assignment methods may allow others to assign sub spaces of the flat namespace but again, this knowledge is only valid internally and should never be inferred or relied upon externally.
None Identifier uniqueness considerations: Identifiers are assigned by SWIFT URN Registration that guarantees uniqueness.
This is simply achieved by keeping track of already assigned names and comparing all new proposed names to the database ones.
If the name already exists a new one has to be proposed.
Identifiers persistence considerations: The assignment process guarantees that names are not reassigned.
In any case SWIFT URNs are guaranteed to remain valid for 15 years.
Names are granted via SWIFT proprietary registration procedures.
Process for identifier resolution: SWIFT URNs are resolved via URN resolvers run under SWIFT responsibility.
Rules for lexical equivalence: No special consideration.
Conformance with URN syntax: No special consideration.
This namespace is reserved to the global financial community.
The following examples are not guaranteed to be real.
They are listed for pedagogical reasons only.
Security Considerations Since the URNs in this namespace are opaque there are no additional security considerations other than those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.
It is noted however that attempting to resolve a SWIFT URN through a resolver other than the one provided by SWIFT is error prone.
In any case, it is not considered authoritative.
The IANA has registered formal URN namespace 15, to SWIFT within the IANA registry of URN NIDs.
