1.  Introduction and Philosophy The Internet community has a well developed, mature set of layered transport and network protocols, which are quite successful in offering both connection oriented (TCP) and connectionless (UDP) transport services over connectionless network services (IP) to end  users.
Many popular network applications have been built directly on top of the TCP and UDP over the past decade.
These have helped the Internet services and protocols to become widely spread de facto standards.
In the past few years, the ISO and CCITT have defined a well architected set of upper layer standards which include connection oriented and connectionless session, presentation, and application layer services and protocols.
These OSI upper layer standards offer valuable services to application developers (e.g., dialogue control, transfer syntax, peer authentication, directory services, etc.)
which are not currently offered by the TCP/IP standards.
As indicated in RFC 1006, it is desirable to offer the OSI upper layer services directly in the Internet without disrupting existing facilities.
This permits a more graceful convergence and transition strategy from IP based networks to OSI based networks in the future.
Using the approach of RFC 1006, this memo specifies how to offer OSI connectionless transport service using the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) [RFC768] of the TCP/IP suite.
We will define a Transport Service Access Point (TSAP) which appears to be identical to the services and interfaces defined in ISO 8072 and its Addendum 1, but we will in fact implement the ISO T UNIT DATA protocol on top of UDP.
By this means, OSI TPDU's can be delivered across the Internet network, and OSI connectionless upper layers can operate fully without knowledge of the fact that they are running on top of UDP/IP.
In essence, the OSI T UNIT DATA service will use UDP as its connectionless network service provider.
The primary motivation for the standard described in this memo is to facilitate the process of gaining experience with OSI connectionless upper layers protocols, i.e., S UNIT DATA [ISO9548], P UNIT DATA [
and A UNIT DATA [ISO10035], and connectionless transport protocol T UNIT DATA [ISO8602].
Though many OSI standard applications such as X.400 and FTAM are connection oriented, it is recognized in the OSI reference model [ISO7498/AD1] as well as in practice that the connectionless mode operations are appropriate for certain distributed application classes and environments.
The following connectionless application classes were identified by
Inward Data Collection    Migratory/Unreliable Processes
Among them, the "request/response" client server application class is the most prominent one, which is gaining popularity and importance.
It is observed that the connection setup and tear down protocol exchanges and complex connection oriented protocol machines become unnecessary overheads for a simple request/response exchange between a client application and a server application, especially in reliable communications environments such as LAN and ISDN.
The OSI connectionless upper layers are thought to be highly effective and efficient, both in time and space, for the distributed application classes mentioned above.
The stability, maturity and wide availability of UDP/IP are ideal for providing solid connectionless transport services independent of actual implementations.
The [ISO 8072/AD1] standard describes the OSI connectionless transport services definition.
The [ISO 8602] standard describes the OSI connectionless transport protocols.
A defining characteristic of transport connectionless mode transmission is the independent nature of each invocation of the connectionless transport service.
The OSI transport service definition describes the services offered by the TS provider and the interfaces used to access those services.
It also describes the services required.
This memo focuses on how UDP [RFC 768] can be used to offer the required services and provide the interfaces.
Each TS user gains access to the TS provider at a TSAP.
In the above diagram one TS user passes a message to the TS provider, and the peer TS user receives the message from the TS provider.
The interactions between TS user and TS provider are described by connectionless TS primitives.
All aspects of [ISO 8072/AD1] are supported in this memo with one exception: QOS (Quality of Service) parameter, which is left for future study.
The OSI standards do not specify the format of a TSAP selector.
However, implementors should consult the GOSIP 1.0 specification [GOSIP88/FIPS146] for an interpretation of this parameter, wherein the TSAP selector consists of two octets and a value of (binary) 1 identifies the service interface between OSI transport layer and session layer.
This RFC assumes that UDP [RFC768] offers the following service primitives
: send datagram   datagram is sent to the IP address/destination port read
datagram   datagram is read from UDP Data can only be read from a receive port after the port has been created.
This is a local matter.
This memo reserves the use of UDP port 102 for the use of applications which realize the CLTS over UDP.
However as with RFC 1006, other port values may be used by prior agreement (e.g., through use of the OSI Directory).
This RFC describes how to use these services to emulate the following connectionless mode network service primitives, which are required by [ISO8602]: N UNIT DATA.REQUEST
A NS user requests unit data to be sent N UNIT DATA.INDICATION
A NS user is notified that unit data can be read from the NSAP
The mapping between the UDP service primitives and the service primitives expected by the connectionless transport peer entity are quite straightforward: connectionless network service  UDP
When UDP indicates that a datagram has been received, a UD TPDU is read from UDP, and a T UNIT DATA.INDICATION primitive is generated.
The following is the UD TPDU structure which is encapsulated in UDP data field:
LI (octet 1)  the length of the header including parameters, but excluding the LI and user data, with a maximum value of 254 UD (octet 2)  the type of TPDU Variable Part (octets 3 to m)
the length of the parameter, not including the parameter code or length fields, with a maximum value of 254 Parameter value:  source or destination T selector
The optional checksum parameter is not required in the variable part since the UDP checksum field in the UDP header already performs the checking.
User Data (octets m 1 to n)  all the data of the TSDU.
The maximum NS user data allowed in the OSI connectionless network service is 64,512 octets.
This limit is further constrained by the lesser maximum datagram size supported by the two communicating UDP peers, which should be known by a priori agreement.
There is a general trend towards support of the OSI protocol suite in the Internet.
This direction is being fostered by the Internet Activities Board (IAB) and its Internet Engineering Task Force, and by the Federal Networking Council.
By offering an OSI connectionless transport service on top of the Internet, this RFC will allow future applications to use the OSI connectionless upper layer services, which are required to be conformant to the OSI upper layer architecture.
Currently, T UNIT DATA, S UNIT DATA, P UNIT DATA, and A UNIT DATA have reached International Standard (IS).
As applications based on OSI connectionless services become widely available and OSI lower layer service is widely implemented in the Internet, the underlying UDP/IP services can be simply replaced with the OSI lower layers.
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
