Abstract Interface identifiers in IPv6 unicast addresses are used to identify interfaces on a link.
They are required to be unique within a subnet.
Several RFCs have specified interface identifiers or identifier ranges that have a special meaning attached to them.
An IPv6 node autoconfiguring an interface identifier in these ranges will encounter unexpected consequences.
Since there is no centralized repository for such reserved identifiers, this document aims to create one.
An IPv6 unicast address is composed of two parts: a subnet prefix and an interface identifier (IID) that identifies a unique interface within the subnet prefix.
The structure of an IPv6 unicast address is depicted in "IPv6 Addressing Architecture" [RFC4291] and is replicated here for clarity.
IPv6 Unicast Address Format For all unicast addresses, except those that start with the binary value 000, Interface IDs are required to be 64 bits long and to be constructed in Modified EUI 64 format [RFC4291].
Examples of mechanisms that generate interface identifiers without a unique token include Cryptographically Generated Addresses [RFC3972], Privacy Addresses [RFC4941], Hash Based Addresses [HBA], etc.
Non unique interface identifiers can also be allocated using managed address assignment mechanisms like DHCPv6
(Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6)
This document applies only to interface identifiers that are formed in the modified EUI 64 format as defined in Appendix A of [RFC4291].
All other types of interface identifiers are out of its scope.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Issues with Reusing Reserved Interface Identifiers Let us assume a node comes up with an interface identifier that has been reserved for use in some other capacity, e.g., an IPv6 node that uses temporary IPv6 addresses
[RFC4941] comes up with an IID of fdff:
This node will receive requests from all nodes that are requesting a service from a Mobile IPv6 home agent since the above mentioned interface identifier has been reserved in [RFC2526] to serve as a MIPv6 home agent's anycast address.
At best, this is an annoyance to the node that came up with this address.
At worst, another node on the link would be denied service and may not look for other methods of acquiring a home agent.
Thus, such reserved interface identifiers MUST NOT be used for autonomous autoconfiguration or for managed address configuration.
There are two possible ways to go about avoiding usage of these reserved interface identifiers.
One of them would be to add a normative reference to each specification that reserves an interface identifier.
The other would be to create an IANA registry for such interface identifiers.
There are two disadvantages to the normative reference approach.
Firstly, this approach does not scale well because the number of such specifications that would need to be updated is large.
Secondly, the maturity level of the document reserving the IID might be lower than the one prohibited from using it; this will cause a downward reference problem.
Therefore, the better solution is to create an IANA registry for this purpose.
This document creates an IANA registry for reserved IPv6 interface identifiers.
Initial values for the reserved IPv6 interface identifiers are given below.
FF80 FDFF:FFFF:FFFF:FFFF   Reserved Subnet Anycast
It is possible that implementations might predate a specific assignment from this registry and hence not be cognizant of the reserved nature of the interface identifier.
Hence, future assignments from this registry are discouraged.
Future assignments, if any, are to be made through Standards Action [RFC5226].
Assignments consist of a single interface identifier or a range of interface identifiers.
These uses do not conflict with the reserved interface identifiers defined here, since the reserved identifiers defined in this document are used for avoiding conflicts with stateless address autoconfiguration that utilizes a 64 bit prefix length.
By utilizing one of the reserved interface identifiers, an IPv6 node might receive requests that it is not authorized to receive.
Information that creates or updates a registration in this registry needs to be authenticated and authorized by the IANA based on the instructions set forth by [RFC5226].
Appendix A.  List of Potentially Affected RFCs Implementations of the following RFCs need to be aware of the reserved interface identifier ranges when they allocate new addresses.
Future revisions of these RFCs should ensure that this is either already sufficiently clear or that the text is amended to take this into account.
RFC 2590 Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Frame Relay Networks Specification  RFC 3315 Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)
Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)  RFC 4489
A Method for Generating Link
Stateless Address Autoconfiguration  RFC 4941
Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6  RFC 4982 Support for Multiple Hash Algorithms in Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGAs)
RFC 5072 IP Version 6 over PPP
