Abstract This document defines the media types for the languages of the W3C Speech Interface Framework, as designed by the Voice Browser Working Group in the following specifications: the Voice Extensible Markup Language (VoiceXML), the Speech Synthesis Markup Language (SSML), the Speech Recognition Grammar Specification (SRGS), the Call Control XML (CCXML), and the Pronunciation Lexicon Specification (PLS).
This specification defines the media types of the Voice Extensible Markup Language (VoiceXML), the Speech Synthesis Markup Language (SSML), the Speech Recognition Grammar Specification (SRGS), the Call Control XML (CCXML), and the Pronunciation Lexicon Specification (PLS), the specifications of the W3C Speech Interface Framework.
([VoiceXML2.0]) is an Extensible Markup Language (XML) designed for creating audio dialogs that feature synthesized speech, digitized audio, recognition of spoken and DTMF key input, recording of spoken input, telephony, and mixed initiative conversations.
The associated media type defined in this document is "application/voicexml xml".
The Speech Synthesis Markup Language specification (SSML) defines an XML based markup language for assisting the generation of synthetic speech in Web and other applications.
The essential role of SSML is to provide authors of synthesizable content a standard way to control aspects of speech such as pronunciation, volume, pitch, and rate, across different synthesis capable platforms.
The associated media type defined in this document is "application/ssml xml".
The Speech Recognition Grammar Specification (SRGS) defines syntax for representing grammars for use in speech recognition so that developers can specify the words and patterns of words to be listened for by a speech recognizer.
The syntax of the grammar format exists in two forms, an Augmented BNF (ABNF) Form and an XML Form.
The respective media types defined in this document are "application/srgs" and "application/srgs xml".
The Call Control EXtensible Markup Language (CCXML) is an XML designed to provide telephony call control support for dialog systems, such as VoiceXML.
The associated media type defined in this document is "application/ccxml xml".
The Pronunciation Lexicon Specification (PLS) defines an XML syntax for specifying pronunciation lexicons to be used by speech recognition and speech synthesis engines in voice browser applications.
The associated media type defined in this document is "application/pls xml".
Registration of application/voicexml xml, application/ssml xml,
application/srgs xml, application/ccxml xml, and application
/pls xml MIME media type name:
application MIME subtype names: voicexml xml, ssml xml, srgs xml, ccxml xml, pls xml Required parameters: none Optional parameters: "charset":
This parameter has identical semantics to the charset parameter of the "application/xml" media type as specified in RFC 3023
Encoding Considerations Identical to those of "application/xml" as described in RFC 3023
There are no known interoperability issues.
Published Specifications Voice Extensible Markup Language 2.0 [VoiceXML2.0]
Voice Extensible Markup Language 2.1
[VoiceXML2.1] Speech Synthesis Markup Language (SSML)
Version 1.0 [SSML] Speech Recognition Grammar Specification Version 1.0
CCXML Version 1.0 [CCXML] Pronunciation Lexicon Specification (PLS)
Applications that Use These Media Types Various W3C Speech Interface Framework implementations use these media types.
Several instructions in the cited specifications may cause arbitrary Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) to be dereferenced.
In this case, the security issues of [RFC3986], section 7, should be considered.
In addition, because of the extensibility features of those specifications, it is possible that the registered media types may describe content that has security implications beyond those described here.
However, if the processor follows only the normative semantics of the specifications, this content will be ignored.
Only in the case where the processor recognizes and processes the additional content, or where further processing of that content is dispatched to other processors, would security issues potentially arise.
And in that case, they would fall outside the domain of this registration document.
Although no byte sequences can be counted on to always be present,
XML MIME entities in ASCII compatible charsets (including UTF 8) often begin with hexadecimal 3C 3F
xml"), and those in UTF 16 often begin with hexadecimal FE FF
6D 00 6C or FF FE 3C 00 3F 00
(the Byte Order Mark (BOM) followed by "<?
For more information, see Appendix F of [XML].
File Extensions VoiceXML files: .vxml
Fragment Identifiers Identical to that of "application/xml" as described in RFC 3023
Macintosh File Type Code "TEXT" 2.6.5.  Person and Email Address to Contact for Further Information World Wide Web Consortium
The Speech Interface Framework specifications set is a work product of the World Wide Web Consortium's Voice Browser Working Group.
The W3C has change control over these specifications.
Registration of application/srgs MIME media type name:
application MIME subtype names: srgs Required parameters:
none Optional parameters: none 3.1.
The ABNF Form of SRGS follows the character encoding handling defined for XML: an ABNF grammar processor must accept both the UTF 8 and UTF 16 encodings of ISO/IEC 10646 and may support other character encodings.
There are no known interoperability issues.
Published Specifications Speech Recognition Grammar Specification Version 1.0 [SRGS] 3.4.
Applications That Use This Media Type Various SRGS implementations use this media type.
Several instructions in SRGS may cause arbitrary URIs to be dereferenced.
In this case, the security issues of [RFC3986], section 7, should be considered.
In addition, because of the extensibility features of SRGS, it is possible that the registered media types may describe content that has security implications beyond those described here.
However, if the processor follows only the normative semantics of the specifications, this content will be ignored.
Only in the case where the processor recognizes and processes the additional content, or where further processing of that content is dispatched to other processors, would security issues potentially arise.
In that case, they would fall outside the domain of this registration document.
The ABNF self identifying header must be present in any legal stand  alone ABNF Form grammar document.
The ABNF byte order mark follows the XML definition and requirements.
For example, documents encoded in UTF  16 must begin with the byte order mark.
If the byte order mark is absent on a grammar encoded in UTF 16, then the grammar processor should perform auto detection of character encoding in a manner analogous to auto  detection of character encoding in XML.
Next follows a single space character (x20) and the required version number, which is "1.0" for this specification (x31 x2e x30).
Macintosh File Type Code "TEXT" 3.6.4.  Person and Email Address to Contact for Further Information World Wide Web Consortium <web human@w3.org> 3.6.5.
The SRGS specification is a work product of the World Wide Web Consortium's Voice Browser Working Group.
The W3C has change control over the SRGS specification.
This document registers six new MIME media types, according to the registrations in Section 2 and Section 3.
