This document describes how intra LIS IP multicast can be efficiently supported among routers over ATM without using the Multicast Address Resolution Server (MARS).
The method described here is specific to Sparse Mode PIM [PIM SM], and relies on the explicit join mechanism inherent in PIM SM to notify routers when they should create group specific point to multipoint VCs.
Overall model This document focuses on forwarding of multicast traffic among PIM SM routers connected to an ATM network.
Routers on an ATM network are partitioned into Logical IP Subnets, or LISs.
This document deals with handling multicast within a single LIS.
Handling inter LIS multicast traffic, including handling shortcuts, is outside the scope of this document.
In addition, this document does not address forwarding of multicast traffic to or from hosts connected to an ATM network.
This document requires that each router within a LIS knows IP and ATM addresses of all other routers within the LIS.
The mapping between IP and ATM addresses may be provided by an ARP server [RFC2225], or by any other means (e.g., static configuration).
Each PIM router within a LIS is required to maintain a single (shared) point to multipoint distribution VC rooted at the router with all other PIM routers in the LIS as the leaf nodes.
The VC is expected to be used for forwarding of multicast traffic (both data and control) among routers within the LIS.
For example, this VC would be used for distributing PIM [PIM SM] control messages (Join/Prune messages).
In addition, if a PIM router receives a IGMP report from an non PIM neighbor, then the router may add the reporter to the existing shared distribution VC or to the group specific distribution VC (if it exists).
The PIM router may also create a specific VC for this IGMP proxy.
Establishing Dedicated, Per Group Point to Multipoint VCs Routers may also maintain group specific, dedicated point to  multipoint VCs.
In particular, an upstream router for a group may choose to become the root of a group specific point to multipoint VC whose leaves are the downstream routers that have directly connected or downstream receivers for the group.
While the criteria for establishing a group specific point to multipoint VC are local to a router, issues such as the volume of traffic associated with the group and the fanout factor within the LIS should be considered.
Finally, note that a router must minimally support a single shared point to multipoint VC for distribution of control messages and data (to all group addresses).
A router can choose to establish a dedicated point to multipoint VC (or add another leaf to an already established dedicated point to  multipoint VC) when it receives a PIM Join or IGMP report messages from another device in the same LIS.
When a router that is the root of a point to multipoint VC receives PIM Prune message or IGMP leave, it removes the originator of the message from its dedicated point  to multipoint VC.
Switching to a Source Rooted Tree
If at least one of the routers within a LIS decides to switch to a source rooted tree (by sending (S,G) PIM Joins), then all other routers within the LIS that have downstream members for G should switch to that source rooted tree as well.
Since a router that switches to a source
rooted tree sends PIM Join messages for (S,G) over its shared point to multipoint VC, the other routers within the LIS are able to detect this.
Once a router that has downstream members for G detects this, the router should send (S,G)
PIM Join message as well
(otherwise the router may receive duplicate traffic from S).
Note that it is possible for a non PIM router in the LIS to fail to receive data if the injection point moves to router to which there is not an existing VC.
Adding New Members to a Source Rooted Tree
As mentioned above, this document requires that once one router in a LIS decides to switch to the source tree for some (S,G), all routers in the LIS that have downstream members must also switch to the (S,G) source tree.
Now, when a new router wants to receive traffic from G, it starts sending ( ,G)
Joins on it's shared point to multipoint VC toward the RP for G.
The root of the (S,G) source rooted tree will know to add the new router to the point to multipoint VC servicing the (S,G) source rooted tree by observing the ( ,G) joins on it's shared point to multipoint VC.
However, the new router must also switch to the (S,G) source rooted tree.
In order to accomplish this, the newly added router must: (i).
Notice that it has been added to a new point to multipoint VC (ii).
Notice (S,G) traffic coming down this new point to multipoint VC (iii).
Send (S,G) joins toward S, causing it to switch to the source rooted tree.
The router learns that the VC is used to distribute (S,G) traffic in the previous steps.
Handing the "Packet Reflection" Problem When a router receives a multicast packet from another router in its own LIS, the router should not send the packet on any of the routers distribution point to multipoint VCs associate with the LIS.
This eliminates the problem of "packet reflection".
Sending the packet on the routers' distribution VCs associated with other LISs is controlled by the multicast routing procedures.
The intra LIS multicast scheme described in this document is intended to be a less complex solution to an important subset of the functionality provided by the Multicast Address Resolution Server, or MARS [MARS].
In particular, it is designed to provide intra LIS multicast between routers using PIM SM, and does not consider the case of host rooted point to multicast multicast distribution VCs.
Although MARS supports both of the current schemes for mapping the IP multicast service model to ATM (multicast server and meshes of point to multipoint VCs), it does so at at cost and complexity higher than of the scheme described in this document.
In addition, MARS requires new encapsulations, whereas this proposal works with either LLC/SNAP or with NLPID encapsulation.
Another important difference is that MARS allows point to multipoint VCs rooted either at a source or at a multicast server (MCS).
The approach taken here is to constrain complexity by focusing on PIM SM (taking advantage of information available in explicit joins), and by allowing point to multipoint VCs to be rooted only at the routers (which is roughly analogous to the complexity and functionality of rooting point to multipoint VCs at the sources).
In summary, the method described in this document is designed for the router to router case, and takes advantage of the explicit join mechanism inherent in PIM SM to provide a simple mechanism for intra LIS multicast between routers.
MARS, on the other hand, accepts different tradeoffs in complexity functionality design space.
In particular, while the MARS paradigm provides a general neighbor discovery mechanism, allows host to participate, and is protocol independent, it does so at considerable cost.
In general, the security issues relevant to the proposal outlined in the memo are subsumed by those faced by PIM SM.
While work in proceeding on security for PIM SM, it is worthwhile noting that several issues have been raised in conjunction with multicast routing and with PIM SM in particular.
These issues include but are not limited to: (i).
Unauthorized use of the RP (iv).
Unauthorized "last hop" switching to shortest path tree.
General Comments on Multicast Routing Protocol Security
Historically, routing protocols used within the Internet have lacked strong authentication mechanisms [RFC1704].
In the late 1980s, analysis revealed that there were a number of security problems in Internet routing protocols then in use [BELLOVIN89].
During the early 1990s it became clear that adversaries were selectively attacking various intra domain and inter domain routing protocols (e.g. via TCP session stealing of BGP sessions) [CERTCA9501, RFC1636].
More recently, cryptographic authentication mechanisms have been developed for RIPv2, OSPF, and the proprietary EIGRP routing protocols.
BGP protection, in the form of a Keyed MD5 option for TCP, has also become widely deployed.
At present, most multicast routing protocols lack strong cryptographic protection.
One possible approach to this is to incorporate a strong cryptographic protection mechanism (e.g. Keyed HMAC MD5 [RFC2104]) within the routing protocol itself.
Alternately, the routing protocol could be designed and specified to use the IP Authentication Header (AH) [RFC1825, RFC1826, RFC2085] to provide cryptographic authentication.
Because the intent of any routing protocol is to propagate routing information to other parties, confidentiality is not generally required in routing protocols.
In those few cases where local security policy might require confidentiality, the use of the IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) [RFC1825, RFC1827] is recommended.
Scalable dynamic multicast key management is an active research area at this time.
Candidate technologies for scalable dynamic multicast key management include CBT based key management [RFC1949] and the Group Key Management Protocol (GKMP)
The IETF IP Security Working Group is actively working on GKMP extensions to the standards track ISAKMP key management protocol being developed in the same working group.
Author Information Dino Farinacci Cisco Systems 170 Tasman Dr. San Jose,
David Meyer Cisco Systems 170 Tasman Dr. San Jose,
dmm@cisco.com Yakov Rekhter cisco Systems,
Inc. 170 Tasman Dr. San Jose,
(914) 528 0090 EMail: yakov@cisco.com
