Abstract IETF procedures generally require that a standards track RFC may not have a normative reference to another standards track document at a lower maturity level or to a non standards track specification (other than specifications from other standards bodies).
For example, a standards track document may not have a normative reference to an informational RFC.
Exceptions to this rule are sometimes needed as the IETF uses informational RFCs to describe non IETF standards or IETF specific modes of use of such standards.
This document clarifies and updates the procedure used in these circumstances.
The Internet Standards Process [RFC2026] Section 4.2.4 specifies the following:
Standards track specifications normally must not depend on other standards track specifications which are at a lower maturity level or on non standards track specifications other than referenced specifications from other standards bodies.
One intent is to avoid creating a perception that a standard is more mature than it actually is.
It should also be noted that Best Current Practice documents [RFC1818] have generally been considered similar to Standards Track documents in terms of what they can reference.
For example, a normative reference to an Experimental RFC has been considered an improper reference per [RFC2026].
The Procedure to Be Used For Standards Track or BCP documents requiring normative reference to documents of lower maturity, the normal IETF Last Call procedure will be issued, with the need for the downward reference explicitly documented in the Last Call itself.
Any community comments on the appropriateness of downward references will be considered by the IESG as part of its deliberations.
Once a specific down reference to a particular document has been accepted by the community (e.g., has been mentioned in several Last Calls), an Area Director may waive subsequent notices in the Last Call of down references to it.
This should only occur when the same document (and version) are being referenced and when the AD believes that the document's use is an accepted part of the community's understanding of the relevant technical area.
For example, the use of MD5 [RFC1321] and HMAC [RFC2104] is well known among cryptographers.
This procedure should not be used if the proper step is to move the document to which the reference is being made into the appropriate category.
It is not intended as an easy way out of normal process.
Rather, the procedure is intended for dealing with specific cases where putting particular documents into the required category is problematic and unlikely ever to happen.
This document is not known to create any new vulnerabilities for the Internet.
On the other hand, inappropriate or excessive use of the process might be considered a downgrade attack on the quality of IETF standards or, worse, on the rigorous review of security aspects of standards.
