This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes managed objects used by IEEE 802.5 end  stations for managing source routes on a Token Ring network where IEEE source routing is in use.
IEEE source routing is described in 802.5 Token Ring Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications [8] and related ISO publications [9, 10, 11].
This memo is an incremental update to RFC 1748 [6].
It is documented separately from the RFC 1748 solely due to the latter's maturity within the Internet standardization process.
The SNMPv2 Network Management Framework
Network Management Framework consists of four major components.
[2] defines MIB II, the core set of managed objects for the Internet suite of protocols.
[3] which defines the administrative and other architectural aspects of the framework.
RFC 1448 [4] which defines the protocol used for network access to managed objects.
The Framework permits new objects to be defined for the purpose of experimentation and evaluation.
Object Definitions Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed the Management Information Base or MIB.
Objects in the MIB are defined using the subset of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) defined in the SMI.
In particular, each object type is named by an OBJECT IDENTIFIER, an administratively assigned name.
The object type together with an object instance serves to uniquely identify a specific instantiation of the object.
For human convenience, we often use a textual string, termed the descriptor, to refer to the object type.
This memo defines a single table: the 802.5 Station Source Routing Table, which contains the source routes known by a end station on an IEEE 802.5 Token Ring network in which IEEE source routing is in use.
Source Routing Source routing extends the 802.5 protocol [8] by assigning a unique ring number to each ring within the extended LAN, and a bridge number to each source routing bridge's connection to a ring.
A Routing Information Field (RIF) must be included in frames which need to traverse multiple rings.
f 0 0 0 0
Relationship to RFC 1748 RFC 1748 [6], the IEEE 802.5 MIB, defines managed objects used for interfaces to IEEE 802.5 Token Ring subnetworks.
This memo is an incremental update to RFC 1748, and is documented independently solely due to the maturity of the definitions contained within RFC 1748.
Relationship to RFC 1525 RFC 1525
[7] defines the MIB objects specific to source routing for source routing and SRT bridges.
This memo defines the MIB objects specific to source routing for source routing end stations.
It is unclear how many, if any, existing systems allow the creation or deletion of "static" 802.5 source routes by network management.
However, SNMPv2 SMI defines that the MAX ACCESS clause as specifying the maximal level of access which makes "protocol sense".
Thus, this memo provides support for static source routes through the dot5SrRouteStatus object, but the conformance statements allow for stations which do not support static source routes, by requiring that compliant agents only need provide read access to dot5SrRouteStatus. 3.5.
Destinations on the Local Ring Entries should be included in the dot5SrRouteTable for destination MAC addresses which are on the same ring as the instrumented 802.5 interface.
For such entries, dot5SrRouteDescr has the value of the zero length string, and dot5SrRouteControl has the corresponding value.
TOKENRING STATION SR MIB DEFINITIONS ::
IMPORTS MODULE IDENTITY, OBJECT TYPE FROM SNMPv2
SMI TEXTUAL CONVENTION, RowStatus, MacAddress FROM SNMPv2
MIB Working Group" CONTACT INFO "
Inc. 170 West Tasman Drive San Jose, CA  95134
kzm@cisco.com" DESCRIPTION "The MIB module for managing source routes in end stations on IEEE 802.5 Token Ring networks."
Represents a Source Route, containing an embedded sequence of bridge and ring ID's, as used by 802.5 Source Routing.
The 802.5 Station Source Route Table
"The table of source routing routes.
This represents the 802.5 RIF database."
current DESCRIPTION "Information on a specific route.
An entry is created whenever a 'Single Path Explorer' or an 'All Paths Explorer' discovers a route to a neighbor not currently in the table, or whenever an 'All Paths Explorer' discovers a better (e.g., shorter) route than the route currently stored in the table.
This is done on behalf of any network layer client.
The ifIndex value in the INDEX clause refers to the value of MIB II's ifIndex object for the interface on which the route is in effect.
"The destination of this route."
"The value of Routing Control field for this route.
"The embedded sequence of bridge and ring ID's for this route.
For destinations on the local ring, the value of this object is the zero length string.
"Annex C of ISO/IEC 10038: 1993, [ANSI/IEEE
"The status of this row.
Values of the instances of dot5SrRouteControl
and dot5SrRouteDescr can be modified while the row's status is 'active."
dot5SrCompliance MODULE COMPLIANCE STATUS  current DESCRIPTION
"The compliance statement for SNMPv2 entities which implement the IEEE 802.5 Station Source Route MIB."
MODULE    this module MANDATORY GROUPS { dot5SrRouteGroup } OBJECT
"Write access is not required, and only the 'active' value need be supported."
"Write access is not required."
"Write access is not required."
{ dot5SrRouteControl, dot5SrRouteDescr, dot5SrRouteStatus } STATUS    current DESCRIPTION
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
