The Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) as defined in [1] is now used as an integral part of the network management framework for TCP/IP based internets.
Together with its companions standards, which define the Structure of Management Information (SMI) [2,3], and the Management Information Base (MIB) [4], the SNMP has received widespread deployment in many operational networks running the Internet suite of protocols.
It should not be surprising that many of these sites might acquire OSI capabilities and may wish to leverage their investment in SNMP technology towards managing those OSI components.
This memo addresses these concerns by defining a framework for running the SNMP in an environment which supports the OSI connectionless mode transport service.
However, as noted in [5], the preferred mapping for SNMP is onto the UDP [6].
This specification is intended for use in environments where UDP transport is not available.
No aspect of this specification should be construed as a suggestion that, in a heterogeneous transport environment, a managed agent should support more than one mapping.
Mapping the SNMP onto the CLTS
The elements of procedure are identical to that of using the UDP.
Note that the CLTS and the service offered by the UDP both transmit packets of information which contain full addressing information.
Thus, mapping the SNMP onto the CLTS, a "transport address" in the context of [1], is simply a transport selector and network address.
It should be noted that the mapping of SNMP onto a connectionless  mode transport service is wholly consistent with SNMP's architectural principles, as described in [1,5].
However, the CLTS itself can be realized using either a connectionless mode or a connection oriented network service.
The mapping described in this mapping allows for either realization.
(When both network services are available, the CLNS should be used as the basis of realization.)
Well known Addresses Unlike the Internet suite of protocols
, OSI does not use well known ports.
Rather, demultiplexing occurs on the basis of "selectors", opaque strings of octets which have local significance.
In order to foster interoperable implementations of the SNMP over the CLTS, it is necessary define four selectors for this purpose.
When the CLTS is used to provide the transport backing for the SNMP, and the CLTS uses a connectionless mode network service, then transport selector used shall be "snmp l" which consists of six ASCII characters; and, SNMP traps are, by convention, sent to an SNMP manager listening on the transport selector "snmpt l" which consists of seven ASCII characters.
When the CLTS is used to provide the transport backing for the SNMP, and the CLTS uses a connection oriented network service,
then transport selector used shall be "snmp o" which consists of six ASCII characters; and, SNMP traps are, by convention, sent to an SNMP manager listening on the transport selector "snmpt o" which consists of seven ASCII characters.
When SNMP traps are sent over the CLTS, the agent addr field in the Trap
PDU contains the IP address "0.0.0.0
" An SNMP manager may ascertain the source of the trap based on information provided by the transport service (i.e., from the T UNIT DATA.INDICATION primitive).
An entity implementing SNMP over OSI must be prepared to accept messages whose size is at least 484 octets.
Implementation of larger values is encouraged whenever possible.
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
