Abstract This document serves to register and document the standard MIME types associated with the 3GPP2 multimedia file format, which is part of the family based on the ISO Media File Format.
The third generation partnership project 2 (3GPP2) for 3rd generation cellular telephony has defined a standard file format to contain audio/visual sequences that may be downloaded to cellular phones [3gpp2].
At the time of writing, the 3GPP2 file format (3G2) can contain H.263, H.264, or MPEG 4 video; and 13K Vocoder, EVRC or AMR Narrow band speech, or AAC audio; and 3GPP timed text.
Within the file, as with all files in the 'ISO' family, there is an intrinsic file type box, which identifies those specifications to which the file complies, and which players (possibly compliant with only one specification) are permitted by the content author to play the file.
This identification is through four letter 'brands'.
Files identified by the MIME [MIME1] type defined in this document MUST contain, in their compatible brands list, a brand defined in a standard (issued by 3GPP2) that can apply to 3GPP2 files.
The MIME types defined in this document are needed correctly to identify such files when they are served over HTTP, included in multi part documents, or used in other places where MIME types are used.
Conventions Used in This Document
In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
The 3GPP2 file format may contain audio, video, and displayable text data.
There is currently no provision for 'active' elements (such as scripts) of any kind.
Clearly, it is possible to author malicious files that attempt to call for an excessively large picture size, high sampling rate audio, etc.
However, clients can and usually do protect themselves against this kind of attack.
It should be noted that selected metadata fields may encompass information partly intended to protect the media against unauthorized use or distribution.
In this case, the intention is that alteration or removal of the data in the field would be treated as an offense under national agreement based World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) treaties.
3GPP2 files have an extensible structure, so it is theoretically possible that metadata fields or media formats could be defined in the future that could be used to induce particular actions on the part of the recipient, thus presenting additional security risks; but this type of capability is currently not supported in the referenced specification.
Encryption, signing, or authentication of these file formats can be done using any media independent transformations of the file or media data.
This registration applies to all files defined as using the '3G2' file format and identified with a suitable brand in a 3GPP2 specification.
The usual file suffix for all these files is ".3g2".
Files with Audio but No Video
The type "audio/3gpp2" may be used for files containing audio but no visual presentation (neither video nor timed text, for example).
Subject:  Registration of Standard MIME media type audio/3gpp2
If the audio/3gpp2 body part contains another container format, the Codecs parameter MUST list all codecs indicated by all formats, including any contained formats.
[3gpp2] Encoding considerations: This data is binary and should be transmitted in a suitable encoding without CR/LF conversion, 7 bit stripping, etc.; base64 is a suitable encoding.
Note that this MIME type is used only for files; separate types are used for real time transfer, such as for the RTP payload format for 13K vocoder speech [RFC2658].
: See the security considerations section in RFC 4393 (this document).
Interoperability considerations: The 3GPP2 organization has defined the specification of the media format [3gpp2].
Interoperability and conformance testing is done in cooperation with other bodies, including the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA)
> and the International Multimedia Telecommunications Consortium (IMTC) <http://www.imtc.org/
3GPP2 C.S0045, 3GPP2 C.S0050 [3gpp2]
3GPP2 specifications are publicly accessible at the 3GPP2 web site, <http://www.3gpp2.org>.
Applications that use this media type:
Multi media Additional information: The type "audio/3gpp2" MAY be used for files containing audio but no visual presentation.
Files served under this type MUST NOT contain any visual material.
(Note that 3GPP timed text
is visually presented and is considered visual material).
However, the file type box must occur first in the file, and MUST contain a 3GPP2 brand in its compatible brands list.
File extension(s): 3g2 and 3gpp2 are both declared at <http://www.nist.gov/nics/>; 3g2 is preferred.
Macintosh file type code(s): '3gp2' Person & email address to contact for further information: H. Garudadri, hgarudadri@qualcomm.com
COMMON Change controller: 3GPP2 3.2.
The type "video/3gpp2" is valid for all files.
It is valid to serve an audio only file as "video/3gpp2".
Subject:  Registration of Standard MIME media type video/3gpp2
If the video/3gpp2 body part contains another container format, the Codecs parameter MUST list all codecs indicated by all formats, including any contained formats.
[3gpp2] Encoding considerations: This data is binary and should be transmitted in a suitable encoding without CR/LF conversion, 7 bit stripping, etc.; base64 is a suitable encoding.
Note that this MIME type is used only for files; separate types are used for real time transfer, such as for the RTP payload formats for H.263
[RFC2429] and 13K vocoder speech [RFC2658].
: See the security considerations section in RFC 4393 (this document).
Interoperability considerations: The 3GPP2 organization has defined the specification of the media format [3gpp2].
Interoperability and conformance testing is done in cooperation with other bodies, including the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA)
> and the International Multimedia Telecommunications Consortium (IMTC) <http://www.imtc.org/
3GPP2 C.S0045, 3GPP2 C.S0050 [3gpp2]
3GPP2 specifications are publicly accessible at the 3GPP2 web site, <http://www.3gpp2.org>.
Applications that use this media type:
Multi media Additional information: Magic number(s): None.
However, the file type box must occur first in the file and MUST contain a 3GPP2 brand in its compatible brands list.
File extension(s): 3g2 and 3gpp2 are both declared at <http://www.nist.gov/nics/>; 3g2 is preferred.
Macintosh file type code(s): '3gp2' Person & email address to contact for further information:
COMMON Change controller: 3GPP2 4.
This document registers the MIME media types audio/3gpp2 and video/3gpp2, defined above.
