Abstract This document describes the standardization collaboration between 3GPP2 and IETF. 1.
Conventions used in this document This document uses significant terminology that is specialized to IETF, 3GPP2, or their areas of work.
See appendix A for definitions of acronyms.
The organizational definitions can be found in their respective web sites.
This document contains a set of principles and guidelines that serves as the basis for establishing the collaboration between 3GPP2 and IETF, with the objective of securing timely development of technical specification that facilitate maximum interoperability with existing (fixed and mobile) Internet systems, devices, and protocols.
Each organization will operate according to their own rules and procedures including rules governing IPR policy, specification elaboration, approval and maintenance.
Reasons For Collaboration 3.1 3GPP2 use of IETF Internet Standards In the further development of 3GPP2 specifications, the benefit of adopting Internet specifications has been identified.
The preferred 3GPP2 approach is to use the Internet standards unchanged, if feasible.
In any case, 3GPP2 has no intention to duplicate work performed in IETF.
However, while this document recognizes the importance of 3GPP2 interoperability with the existing Internet and hence the use of IETF standards, 3GPP2 recognizes that additions or modifications might be needed in order to make the IETF internet specification fulfill the needs of 3GPP2.
In such cases, 3GPP2 will take its concerns directly to the appropriate IETF working groups for resolution, or to an appropriate Area Director if no appropriate working group can be found.
3.2 IETF access to 3GPP2 Wireless expertise
The technical work in 3GPP2 is organized in
Technical Specification Groups TSGs each with their area of responsibilities.
TSG A and TSG C are responsible for the Radio Access networks based on CDMA and thus the experts in the areas of the characteristics of the physical transport.
TSG N is responsible for the Mobility Management and other core network protocol and functionalities.
TSG P is responsible for data services and applications.
TSG S is responsible for the service and system aspects including the overall architecture, security and O&M aspects.
Contacts for the TSGs can be found on the 3GPP2 web site www.3gpp2.org.
Document Sharing Both 3GPP2 and IETF encourage the sharing of draft documents that are of mutual interest.
3GPP2 working documents are available on its official web site, and are grouped according to the meeting.
These documents can be found on the 3GPP2 ftp server, which is open to anyone, at ftp://ftp.3gpp2.org.
3GPP2 specifications, those that have completed the 15 day Steering Committee review, can be found at: http://www.3gpp2.org/Public html/Specs/index.cfm IETF documents, including preliminary working documents ("Internet Drafts") are available on its web site (http://www.ietf.org/) and various shadow sites.
IETF representatives can obtain information about the 3GPP2 document and web site structures by contacting the relevant 3GPP2 contact points indicated at the 3GPP2 web site (www.3gpp2.org).
3GPP2 representatives can obtain information about the IETF document and web site structures by contacting the relevant IETF contact points, which are the Area Directors indicated at the IETF web site (www.ietf.org).
Whenever possible, informal communication at working level is encouraged.
The vast majority of the technical discussions and decision making at IETF is done over mailing lists.
It is recommended that interested individuals subscribe to and participate in these lists.
3GPP2 mailing lists, however, are not open to the general public.
It is recommended that work of mutual interest be discussed on the relevant IETF mailing lists.
When deemed necessary, formal communication between 3GPP2 and IETF is also permitted.
Relevant IETF Area Directors and 3GPP2 technical leadership are encouraged and authorized to facilitate such communications when needed.
Rapporteurs/coordinators 6.1 IETF coordination support in 3GPP2 An IETF rapporteur function is established in 3GPP2 Steering Committee.
The individual(s) appointed to undertake the responsibility of this function should be the initial contact point in 3GPP2 for matters pertaining to the 3GPP2 IETF cooperation.
Of course, the chairman of Steering Committee can always be contacted.
The 3GPP2 IETF rapporteur function, therefore, is expected to work with the concerned working groups and TSGs and support the interaction between 3GPP2 and IETF.
6.2 3GPP2 Liaison in IETF
The preferred way for organizations to work with IETF is through the working groups.
However, IETF has a limited number of liaison relationships with other organizations when conditions warrant the appointment of a specific person.
The appointment of a specific person in IESG to function as a "3GPP2 liaison" is proposed.
The role of the 3GPP2 Liaison is to act as an initial contact point in IETF for administrative aspects of this collaboration that cannot easily be handled in other ways (e.g., at a technical level by interactions with IETF Working Groups or Area Directors).
It is agreed that the role does not carry the expectation of attendance at 3GPP2 meetings or participation in 3GPP2 administrative processes and anticipated that all liaison efforts assigned to this individual will be carried out by electronic mail.
It is understood that the liaison will not have the ability to make exceptions to, or special provisions for, IETF policies and procedures.
In order to assist the information flow between the organizations, IETF can on a per case basis appoint an observer to participate and represent IETF at 3GPP2 technical meetings.
IETF meetings are open to any interested individuals.
3GPP2 partners (OPs, MRPs) or individual members can participate in any of the IETF meetings, in accordance with the existing IETF procedures.
3GPP2 meetings are also open to any interested individual, however such individuals do not have voting privileges.
The meeting schedule can be found on the 3GPP2 web site.
This type of non protocol document does not directly affect the security of the Internet.
This memo took guidance from and borrowed text from RFC 3113.[4]
