Abstract This document describes the "environment" extension to the Sieve email filtering language.
The "environment" extension gives a Sieve script access to information about the Sieve interpreter itself, where it is running, and about any transport connection currently involved in transferring the message.
Sieve [RFC5228] is a language for filtering email messages at or around the time of final delivery.
It is designed to be implementable on either a mail client or mail server.
It is suitable for running on a mail server where users may not be allowed to execute arbitrary programs, such as on black box Internet Message Access Protocol [RFC3501] servers,
as it has no user controlled loops or the ability to run external programs.
Although Sieve is intended to be independent of access protocol, mail architecture, and operating system, in some cases it is useful to allow scripts to access information about their execution context.
The "environment" extension provides a new environment test that can be used to implement scripts that behave differently when moved from one system to another, when messages arrive from different remote sources or when otherwise operated in different contexts.
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
The terms used to describe the various components of the Sieve language are taken from Section 1.1 of [RFC5228].
This document refers to the ABNF productions IPv4 address literal, IPv6 address literal, and General address literal defined in Section 4.1.3 of [RFC2821].
The location item makes use of standard terms for email service components.
Additional information and background on these terms can be found in [EMAIL ARCH].
The capability string associated with the extension defined in this document is "environment".
The environment test retrieves the item of environment information specified by the name string and matches it to the values specified in the key list argument.
The test succeeds if a match occurs.
The type of match defaults to ":is" and the default comparator is "i;ascii casemap".
The current message is not a direct source of information for the environment test; the item of information specified by the name string is extracted from the script's operating environment and the key list argument comes from the script.
The environment test MUST fail unconditionally if the specified information item does not exist.
A script MUST NOT fail with an error if the item does not exist.
This allows scripts to be written that handle nonexistent items gracefully.
The "relational" extension [RFC5231] adds a match type called ":count".
The count of an environment test is 0 if the environment information returned is the empty string, or 1 otherwise.
Environment items can be standardized or vendor defined.
An IANA registry is defined for both types of items.
Extensions designed for interoperable use SHOULD be defined in standards track or experimental RFCs.
4.1.  Initial Standard Environment Items
The fully qualified domain name of the host where the Sieve script is executing.
This item provides additional information about the type of service that is evaluating the script.
Possible values are "MTA", meaning the Sieve is being evaluated by a Message Transfer Agent, "MDA", meaning evaluation is being performed by a Mail Delivery Agent, "MUA",
meaning evaluation is being performed by a Mail User Agent, and "MS", meaning evaluation is being performed by a Message Store.
Additional information and background on these terms can be found in [EMAIL ARCH].
The product name associated with the Sieve interpreter.
The point relative to final delivery where the Sieve script is being evaluated.
Possible values are "pre", "during", and "post", referring respectively to processing before, during, and after final delivery has taken place. "
The empty string will be returned if for some reason this information cannot be obtained for the current client.
IPv4, IPv6, and other types of addresses are respectively represented in the formats defined by the IPv4 address literal, IPv6 address literal, and General address literal productions defined in Section 4.1.3 of [RFC2821].
The product version associated with the Sieve interpreter.
The meaning of the product version string is product specific and should always be considered in the context of the product name given by the "name" item.
Implementations SHOULD support as many of the items on this initial list as possible.
Additional standardized items can only be defined in standards track or experimental RFCs.
Vendor defined Environment Items Environment item names beginning with "vnd.
" represent vendor defined extensions.
Such extensions are not defined by Internet standards or RFCs, but are still registered with IANA in order to prevent conflicts.
IANA Registration of Environment Items
A registry of environment items is provided by IANA.
Item names may be registered on a first come, first served basis.
Groups of items defined in a standards track or experimental RFC MAY choose to use a common name prefix of the form "name.", where "name" is a string that identifies the group of related items.
Items not defined in a standards track or experimental RFC MUST have a name that begins with the "vnd." prefix, and this prefix is followed by the name of the vendor or product, such as "vnd.acme.rocket sled status".
The following template is to be used for registering new Sieve environment item names with IANA.
email and/or physical address to contact for additional information]
Multiple items and descriptions MAY be specified in a single registration request.
Both standardized and vendor defined items use this form.
The environment extension may be used to obtain information about the system the Sieve implementation is running on.
This information in turn may reveal details about service provider or enterprise infrastructure.
An implementation can use any technique to determine the remote host environment item defined in this specification, and the trustworthiness of the result will vary.
One common method will be to perform a PTR DNS lookup on the client IP address.
This information may come from an untrusted source.
All of the security considerations given in the base Sieve specification also apply to this extension.
The following template specifies the IANA registration of the Sieve extension specified in this document:
Registration of new Sieve extension Capability name:
This specification also defines a new IANA registry for Sieve environment item names.
The specifics of this registry are given in Section 4.3.
The initial contents of the registry are given in the following section.
The following template specifies the initial IANA registrations for the environment items defined in this document:
Registration of new Sieve environment items
The primary DNS domain associated with the Sieve execution context, usually but not always a proper suffix of the host name.
The product name associated with the Sieve interpreter.
