Abstract In some scenarios, MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP)
pseudowires (PWs) (RFC 5921) may be statically configured when a dynamic control plane is not available.
A fast protection mechanism for MPLS TP PWs is needed to protect against the failure of an Attachment Circuit (AC), the failure of a Provider Edge (PE), or a failure in the Packet Switched Network (PSN).
The framework and typical scenarios of dual  homing PW local protection are described in RFC 8184.
This document proposes a dual homing coordination mechanism for MPLS TP PWs that is used for state exchange and switchover coordination between the dual  homing PEs for dual homing PW local protection.
Introduction [RFC6372], [RFC6378], and [RFC7771] describe the framework and mechanism of MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP) linear protection, which can provide protection for the MPLS Label Switched Path (LSP) and pseudowires (PWs) between the edge nodes.
These mechanisms cannot protect against the failure of the Attachment Circuit (AC) or the edge nodes.
[RFC6718] and [RFC6870] specify the PW redundancy framework and mechanism for protecting the AC or edge node against failure by adding one or more edge nodes, but it requires PW switchover in case of an AC failure; also, PW redundancy relies on Packet Switched Network (PSN) protection mechanisms to protect against the failure of PW.
In some scenarios such as mobile backhauling, the MPLS PWs are provisioned with dual homing topology in which at least the Customer Edge (CE) node on one side is dual homed to two Provider Edge (PE) nodes.
If a failure occurs in the primary AC, operators usually prefer to perform local switchover in the dual homing PE side and keep the working pseudowire unchanged, if possible.
This is to avoid massive PW switchover in the mobile backhaul network due to AC failure in the mobile core site; such massive PW switchover may in turn lead to congestion caused by migrating traffic away from the preferred paths of network planners.
Similarly, as multiple PWs share the physical AC in the mobile core site, it is preferable to keep using the working AC when one working PW fails in the PSN to potentially avoid unnecessary switchover for other PWs.
To meet the above requirements, a fast dual homing PW protection mechanism is needed to protect against failure in the AC, the PE node, and the PSN.
[RFC8184] describes a framework and several scenarios of dual homing PW local protection.
This document proposes a dual homing coordination mechanism for static MPLS TP PWs; the mechanism is used for information exchange and switchover coordination between the dual homing PEs for the dual homing PW local protection.
The proposed mechanism has been implemented and deployed in several mobile backhaul networks that use static MPLS TP PWs for the backhauling of mobile traffic from the radio access sites to the core site.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
Overview of the Proposed Solution Linear protection mechanisms for the MPLS TP network are defined in [RFC6378],
When such mechanisms are applied to PW linear protection [RFC7771], both the working PW and the protection PW are terminated on the same PE node.
In order to provide dual homing protection for MPLS TP PWs, some additional mechanisms are needed.
In MPLS TP PW dual homing protection, the linear protection mechanism (as defined in [RFC6378], [RFC7271], and [RFC7324]) on the single  homing PE (e.g., PE3 in Figure 1) is not changed, while on the dual  homing side, the working PW and protection PW are terminated on two dual homing PEs (e.g., PE1 and PE2 in Figure 1), respectively, to protect against a failure occurring in a PE or a connected AC.
As described in [RFC8184], a dedicated Dual Node Interconnection (DNI) PW is used between the two dual homing PE nodes to forward the traffic.
In order to utilize the linear protection mechanism [RFC7771] in the dual homing PEs scenario, coordination between the dual homing PE nodes is needed so that the dual homing PEs can switch the connection between the AC, the service PW, and the DNI PW properly in a coordinated fashion by the forwarder.
Dual Homing Protection with DNI PW 4.
Protocol Extensions for Dual Homing MPLS TP PW Protection
In dual homing MPLS TP PW local protection, the forwarding states of the dual homing PEs are determined by the forwarding state machine in Table 1.
Dual Homing PE Forwarding State Machine
In order to achieve dual homing MPLS TP PW protection, coordination between the dual homing PE nodes is needed to exchange the PW status and protection coordination requests.
Information Exchange Between Dual Homing PEs The coordination information will be sent on the DNI PW over the Generic Associated Channel (G ACh) as described in [RFC5586].
A new G ACh channel type is defined for the dual homing coordination between the dual homing PEs of MPLS TP PWs.
This channel type can be used for the exchange of different types of information between the dual homing PEs.
This document uses this channel type for the exchange of PW status and switchover coordination between the dual  homing PEs.
Other potential usages of this channel type are for further study and are out of the scope of this document.
The MPLS TP Dual Homing Coordination (DHC) message is sent on the DNI PW between the dual homing PEs.
The format of the MPLS TP DHC message is shown below:
MPLS TP Dual Homing Coordination Message
The first 4 octets is the common G ACh header as specified in [RFC5586].
The DHC Channel Type is the G ACh channel type code point assigned by IANA (0x0009).
The Dual Homing Group ID is a 4 octet unsigned integer to identify the dual homing group to which the dual homing PEs belong.
It MUST be the same at both PEs in the same group.
The TLV Length field specifies the total length in octets of the subsequent TLVs.
In this document, two TLVs are defined in the MPLS TP Dual Homing Coordination message for dual homing MPLS TP PW protection:
The PW Status TLV is used by a dual homing PE to report its service PW status to the other dual homing PE in the same dual homing group. 0
The Length field specifies the length in octets of the value field of the TLV.
PE Node ID is the 32 bit identifier of the receiver PE [RFC6370], which supports both IPv4 and IPv6 environments.
Usually it is the same as the Label Switching Router ID (LSR ID) of the receiver PE.
The Source Dual Homing PE Node ID is the 32 bit identifier of the sending PE [RFC6370], which supports both IPv4 and IPv6 environments.
Usually it is the same as the LSR ID of the sending PE.
The DNI PW ID field contains the 32 bit PW ID [RFC8077] of the DNI  PW.
The Flags field contains 32 bit flags, in which:  The P (Protection) bit indicates whether the Source Dual Homing PE is the working PE (P 0) or the protection PE (P 1).
Other bits are reserved for future use, which MUST be set to 0 on transmission and MUST be ignored upon receipt.
The Service PW Status field indicates the status of the service PW between the sending PE and the remote PE.
Currently, two bits are defined in the Service PW Status field:  F bit: If set, it indicates Signal Fail (SF) [RFC6378] on the service PW.
It can be either a local request generated by the PE itself or a remote request received from the remote PE.
D bit: If set, it indicates Signal Degrade (SD)
[RFC6378] on the service PW.
It can be either a local request or a remote request received from the remote PE.
Other bits are reserved for future use, which MUST be set to 0 on transmission and MUST be ignored upon receipt.
The Dual Node Switching TLV is used by one dual homing PE to send protection state coordination to the other PE in the same dual homing group. 0
The Length field specifies the length in octets of the value field of the TLV.
PE Node ID is the 32 bit identifier of the receiver PE [RFC6370].
Usually it is the same as the LSR ID of the receiver PE.
The Source Dual Homing PE Node ID is the 32 bit identifier of the sending PE [RFC6370].
Usually it is the same as the LSR ID of the sending PE.
The DNI PW ID field contains the 32 bit PW ID [RFC8077] of the DNI  PW.
The Flags field contains 32 bit flags, in which:  The P (Protection) bit indicates whether the Source Dual Homing PE is the working PE (P 0) or the protection PE (P 1).
The S (PW Switching) bit indicates which service PW is used for forwarding traffic.
It is set to 0 when traffic will be transported on the working PW, and it is set to 1 if traffic will be transported on the protection PW.
The value of the S bit is determined by the protection coordination mechanism between the dual homing PEs and the remote PE.
Other bits are reserved for future use, which MUST be set to 0 on transmission and MUST be ignored upon receipt.
When a change of service PW status is detected by one of the dual  homing PEs, it MUST be reflected in the PW Status TLV and sent to the other dual homing PE as quickly as possible to allow for fast protection switching using three consecutive DHC messages.
This set of three messages allows for fast protection switching even if one or two of these packets are lost or corrupted.
After the transmission of the three rapid messages, the dual homing PE MUST send the most recently transmitted service PW status periodically to the other dual homing PE on a continual basis using the DHC message.
When one dual homing PE determines that the active service PW needs to be switched from the working PW to the protection PW, it MUST send the Dual Node Switching TLV to the other dual homing PE as quickly as possible to allow for fast protection switching using three consecutive DHC messages.
After the transmission of the three messages, the protection PW would become the active service PW, and the dual homing PE MUST send the most recently transmitted Dual Node Switching TLV periodically to the other dual homing PE on a continual basis using the DHC message.
It is RECOMMENDED that the default interval of the first three rapid DHC messages be 3.3 ms, similar to [RFC6378], and the default interval of the subsequent messages is 1 second.
Both the default interval of the three consecutive messages as well as the default interval of the periodic messages SHALL be configurable by the operator.
The dual homing MPLS TP PW protection mechanism can be deployed with the existing AC redundancy mechanisms.
On the PSN side, a PSN tunnel protection mechanism is not required, as the dual homing PW protection can also protect if a failure occurs in the PSN.
This section uses the one side dual homing scenario as an example to describe the dual homing PW protection procedures; the procedures for a two side dual homing scenario would be similar.
On the dual homing PE side, the role of working and protection PE are set by the management system or local configuration.
The service PW connecting to the working PE is the working PW, and the service PW connecting to the protection PE is called the protection PW.
On the single homing PE side, it treats the working PW and protection PW as if they terminate on the same remote PE node, thus normal MPLS  TP protection coordination procedures still apply on the single  homing PE.
: Components of One Side Dual Homing PW Protection In Figure 5, for each dual homing PE, the service PW is the PW used to carry service between the dual homing PE and the remote PE.
The state of the service PW is determined by the Operation, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) mechanisms between the dual  homing PEs and the remote PE.
The DNI PW is provisioned between the two dual homing PE nodes.
It is used to bridge traffic when a failure occurs in the PSN or in the ACs.
The state of the DNI PW is determined by the OAM mechanism between the dual homing PEs.
Since the DNI PW is used to carry both the DHC messages and the service traffic during protection switching, it is important to ensure the robustness of the DNI PW.
In order to avoid the DNI PW failure due to the failure of a particular link, it is RECOMMENDED that multiple diverse links be deployed between the dual homing PEs and the underlying Label Switched Path (LSP) protection mechanism SHOULD be enabled.
The AC is the link that connects a dual homing PE to the dual homed CE.
The status of AC is determined by the existing AC redundancy mechanisms; this is out of the scope of this document.
In order to perform dual homing PW local protection, the service PW status and Dual Node Switching coordination requests are exchanged between the dual homing PEs using the DHC message defined in Section 4.1.
Whenever a change of service PW status is detected by a dual homing PE, it MUST be reflected in the PW Status TLV and sent to the other dual homing PE immediately using the three consecutive DHC messages.
After the transmission of the three rapid messages, the dual homing PE MUST send the most recently transmitted service PW status periodically to the other dual homing PE on a continual basis using the DHC message.
This way, both dual homing PEs have the status of the working and protection PW consistently.
When there is a switchover request either generated locally or received on the protection PW from the remote PE, based on the status of the working and protection service PW along with the local and remote request of the protection coordination between the dual homing PEs and the remote PE, the active/standby state of the service PW can be determined by the dual homing PEs.
As the remote protection coordination request is transmitted over the protection path, in this case the active/standby status of the service PW is determined by the protection PE in the dual homing group.
If it is determined on one dual homing PE that switchover of the service PW is needed, this dual homing PE MUST set the S bit in the Dual Node Switching TLV and send it to the other dual homing PE immediately using the three consecutive DHC messages.
With the exchange of service PW status and the switching request, both dual  homing PEs are consistent on the active/standby forwarding status of the working and protection service PWs.
The status of the DNI PW is determined by PW OAM mechanism as defined in [RFC5085], and the status of ACs is determined by existing AC redundancy mechanisms: both are out of the scope of this document.
The forwarding behavior on the dual homing PE nodes is determined by the forwarding state machine as shown in Table 1.
Using the topology in Figure 5 as an example, in normal state, the working PW (PW1) is in active state, the protection PW (PW2) is in standby state, the DNI PW is up, and AC1 is in active state according to the AC redundancy mechanism.
According to the forwarding state machine in Table 1, traffic will be forwarded through the working PW (PW1) and the primary AC (AC1).
No traffic will go through the protection PE (PE2) or the DNI PW, as both the protection PW (PW2) and the AC connecting to PE2 are in standby state.
If a failure occurs in AC1, the state of AC2 changes to active according to the AC redundancy mechanism, while there is no change in the state of the working and protection PWs.
According to the forwarding state machine in Table 1, PE1 starts to forward traffic between the working PW and the DNI PW, and PE2 starts to forward traffic between AC2 and the DNI PW.
It should be noted that in this case only AC switchover takes place; in the PSN, traffic is still forwarded using the working PW.
If a failure in the PSN brings PW1 down, the failure can be detected by PE1 or PE3 using existing OAM mechanisms.
If PE1 detects the failure of PW1, it MUST inform PE2 of the state of the working PW using the PW Status TLV in the DHC messages and change the forwarding status of PW1 to standby.
On receipt of the DHC message, PE2 SHOULD change the forwarding status of PW2 to active.
Then, according to the forwarding state machine in Table 1, PE1 SHOULD set up the connection between the DNI PW and AC1, and PE2 SHOULD set up the connection between PW2 and the DNI PW.
According to the linear protection mechanism [RFC6378], PE2 also sends an appropriate protection coordination message [RFC6378] over the protection PW (PW2) to PE3 for the remote side to switchover from PW1 to PW2.
If PE3 detects the failure of PW1, according to the linear protection mechanism [RFC6378], it sends a protection coordination message on the protection PW (PW2) to inform PE2 of the failure on the working PW.
Upon receipt of the message, PE2 SHOULD change the forwarding status of PW2 to active and set up the connection according to the forwarding state machine in Table 1.
PE2 SHOULD send a DHC message to PE1 with the S bit set in the Dual Node Switching TLV to coordinate the switchover on PE1 and PE2.
This is useful for a unidirectional failure that cannot be detected by PE1.
If a failure brings the working PE (PE1) down, the failure can be detected by both PE2 and PE3 using existing OAM mechanisms.
Both PE2 and PE3 SHOULD change the forwarding status of PW2 to active and send a protection coordination message [RFC6378] on the protection PW (PW2) to inform the remote side to switchover.
According to the existing AC redundancy mechanisms, the status of AC1 changes to standby and the state of AC2 changes to active.
According to the forwarding state machine in Table 1, PE2 starts to forward traffic between the PW2 and AC2.
IANA Considerations IANA has assigned a new channel type for the "MPLS TP Dual Homing Coordination Message" from the "MPLS Generalized Associated Channel (G ACh) Types (including Pseudowire Associated Channel Types)
" subregistry within the "Generic Associated Channel (G ACh) Parameters" registry.
MPLS TP Dual Homing Coordination message
RFC 8185 IANA has created a new subregistry called "MPLS TP DHC TLVs" within the "Generic Associated Channel (G ACh) Parameters" registry.
The registry has the following fields and initial allocations:
The allocation policy for this registry is IETF Review, as specified in [RFC8126].
Security Considerations MPLS TP is a subset of MPLS and so builds upon many of the aspects of the MPLS security model.
Please refer to [RFC5920] for generic MPLS security issues and methods for securing traffic privacy and integrity.
The DHC message defined in this document contains control information.
If it is injected or modified by an attacker, the dual  homing PEs might not agree on which PE should be used to deliver the CE traffic, and this could be used as a denial of service attack against the CE.
It is important that the DHC message be used within a trusted MPLS TP network domain as described in [RFC6941].
The DHC message is carried in the G ACh [RFC5586], so it is dependent on the security of the G ACh itself.
The G ACh is a generalization of the Associated Channel defined in [RFC4385].
Thus, this document relies on the security mechanisms provided for the Associated Channel as described in those two documents.
As described in the Security Considerations section of [RFC6378], the G ACh is essentially connection oriented, so injection or modification of control messages requires the subversion of a transit node.
Such subversion is generally considered hard in connection  oriented MPLS networks and impossible to protect against at the protocol level.
Management level techniques are more appropriate.
The procedures and protocol extensions defined in this document do not affect the security model of MPLS TP linear protection as defined in [RFC6378].
Uniqueness of the identifiers defined in this document is guaranteed by the assigner (e.g., the operator).
Failure by an assigner to use unique values within the specified scoping for any of the identifiers defined herein could result in operational problems.
Please refer to [RFC6370] for more details about the uniqueness of the identifiers.
The following individuals substantially contributed to the content of this document:
Kai Liu Huawei Technologies Email:
Shahram Davari Broadcom Corporation Email:
