Abstract This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) "mef" for Uniform Resource Names (URNs) used to identify resources published by MEF Forum (https://www.mef.net).
MEF specifies and manages resources that utilize this URN identification model.
Management activities for these and other resources types are handled by the manager of the MEF Assigned Names and Numbers (MANN) registry.
The MEF Forum (MEF) is a nonprofit international industry standards organization dedicated to the worldwide adoption of Carrier Ethernet (CE) networks and services.
The forum creates specifications in the areas of Services, Architecture, and Operations and Management.
As part of these specifications efforts, there is a need to identify identifiers in a managed namespace that are unique and persistent.
To ensure that this namespace's uniqueness is absolute, a registration of a specific URN Syntax [RFC2141] Namespace Identifier (NID) for use by MEF is being specified in this document.
URN Specification for MEF Namespace ID: mef Registration information: registration version number: 1 registration date: 2016 02 08
Declared registrant of the namespace:
Role: Manager, MEF Namespace Email: namespace@mef.net Declaration of syntactic structure:
The syntax of namespace specific strings for the "mef" namespace is <NSS> in RFC 2141.
MEF publishes information regarding the registered resources in the MEF Assigned Names and Numbers (MANN) registry (https://www.mef.net/MANN).
Identifier uniqueness considerations: MEF will manage resource classes using the "mef" NID and will be the authority for managing resources and associated subsequent strings.
MEF is expected to guarantee the uniqueness of the strings themselves, or it may permit secondary responsibility for certain defined resources.
MEF could allow for use of experimental type values for testing purposes only.
Note that using experimental types may create collisions as multiple users may use the same values for different resources and specific strings.
Identifier persistence considerations: MEF will update the MEF Assigned Names and Numbers (MANN) registry to document the registered resources that will use the "mef" NID.
Assignment of a URN from the MEF namespace will be documented as part of the MEF Assigned Names and Numbers (MANN) registry.
Process of identifier resolution: The namespace is not listed with a Resolution Discovery System (RDS).
Therefore, this process is not relevant.
The entire URN is case insensitive.
No special considerations Validation mechanism: None specified.
URN assignment will be handled by procedures implemented in support of MEF activities.
The following are examples of URNs that MEF is looking to assign:
There are no security considerations other than those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general, which are described in "Function Requirements for Uniform Resource Names" [RFC1737] and "URN Syntax" [RFC2141].
IANA Considerations Per this document, IANA has added a new entry ("mef") in the "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespaces" registry available from the IANA site (https://www.iana.org).
