This RFC identifies the documents specifying the official protocols used in the Internet.
Annotations identify any revisions or changes planned.
To first order, the official protocols are those in the "Internet Protocol Transition Workbook" (IPTW) dated March 1982.
There are several protocols in use that are not in the IPTW.
A few of the protocols in the IPTW have been revised.
Notably, the mail protocols have been revised and issued as a volume titled "Internet Mail Protocols" dated November 1982.
Telnet and the most useful option protocols were issued by the NIC in a booklet entitled "Internet Telnet Protocol and Options" (ITP), dated June 1983.
Some protocols have not been revised for many years, these are found in the old "ARPANET Protocol Handbook" (APH) dated January 1978.
There is also a volume of protocol related information called the "Internet Protocol Implementers Guide" (IPIG) dated August 1982.
This document is organized as a sketchy outline.
The entries are protocols (e.g., Transmission Control Protocol).
In each entry there are notes on status, specification, comments, other references, dependencies, and contact.
The status is one of: required, recommended, elective, or experimental.
The specification identifies the protocol defining documents.
The comments describe any differences from the specification or problems with the protocol.
The other references identify documents that comment on or expand on the protocol.
The dependencies indicate what other protocols are called upon by this protocol.
The contact indicates a person who can answer questions about the protocol.
In particular, the status may be: required all hosts must implement the required protocol, recommended all hosts are encouraged to implement the recommended protocol, elective hosts may implement or not the elective protocol, experimental hosts should not implement the experimental protocol unless they are participating in the experiment and have coordinated their use of this protocol with the contact person, and none this is not a protocol.
For further information about protocols in general, please contact: Joyce Reynolds USC Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, California  90292
Phone: (213) 822 1511 ARPA mail:
None SPECIFICATION:  IEN 48 (in IPTW)
Gives an overview of the organization and principles of the Internet.
Could be revised and expanded.
RFC 871 A Perspective on the ARPANET Reference Model DEPENDENCIES: CONTACT:
Required SPECIFICATION:  RFC 791 (in IPTW)
This is the universal protocol of the Internet.
This datagram protocol provides the universal addressing of hosts in the Internet.
A few minor problems have been noted in this document.
The most serious is a bit of confusion in the route options.
The route options have a pointer that indicates which octet of the route is the next to be used.
The confusion is between the phrases "the pointer is relative to this option" and "the smallest legal value for the pointer is 4".
If you are confused, forget about the relative part, the pointer begins at 4.
Another important point is the alternate reassembly procedure suggested in RFC 815.
You have not completed an implementation of IP if it does not include ICMP.
RFC 815 (in IPIG) IP Datagram Reassembly Algorithms RFC 814 (in IPIG) Names, Addresses, Ports, and Routes RFC 816 (in IPIG)
Fault Isolation and Recovery RFC 817 (in IPIG) Modularity and Efficiency in Protocol Implementation MIL STD 1777 Military Standard Internet Protocol
CONTACT: Postel@USC ISIF.ARPA Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP)
Required SPECIFICATION:  RFC 792 (in IPTW)
The control messages and error reports that go with the Internet Protocol.
A few minor errors in the document have been noted.
Suggestions have been made for additional types of redirect message and additional destination unreachable messages.
Note that ICMP is defined to be an integral part of IP.
You have not completed an implementation of IP if it does not include ICMP.
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 768 (in IPTW)
COMMENTS: Provides a datagram service to applications.
Adds port addressing to the IP services.
The only change noted for the UDP specification is a minor clarification that if in computing the checksum a padding octet is used for the computation it is not transmitted or counted in the length.
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 793 (in IPTW)
COMMENTS: Provides reliable end to end data stream service.
Many comments and corrections have been received for the TCP specification document.
These are primarily document bugs rather than protocol bugs.
There are many minor corrections and clarifications needed in this section.
There are still some phrases in the document that give a "record mark" flavor to the push.
These should be further clarified.
The push is not a record mark.
Several comments have been received on difficulties with contacting listening servers.
There should be some discussion of implementation issues for servers, and Official ARPA Internet Protocols
some notes on alternative models of system and process organization for servers.
The maximum segment size option should be generalized and clarified.
It can be used to either increase or decrease the maximum segment size from the default.
The TCP Maximum Segment Size is the IP Maximum Datagram Size minus forty.
The default IP Maximum Datagram Size
The default TCP Maximum Segement Size is 536.
For further discussion, see RFC 879.
There have been questions about automatically closing idle connections.
Idle connections are ok, and should not be closed.
There are several cases where idle connections arise, for example, in Telnet when a user is thinking for a long time following a message from the server computer before his next input.
There is no TCP "probe" mechanism, and none is needed.
Queued Receive Data on Closing
:  There are several points where it is not clear from the description what to do about data received by the TCP but not yet passed to the user, particularly when the connection is being closed.
In general, the data is to be kept to give to the user if he does a RECV call.
The description says that segments that arrive out of order, that is, are not exactly the next segment to be processed, may be kept on hand.
It should also point out that there is a very large performance penalty for not doing so.
This is the time out started on an open or send call.
If this user time out occurs the user should be notified, but the connection should not be closed or the TCB deleted.
The user should explicitly ABORT the connection if he wants to give up.
RFC 813 (in IPIG) Window and Acknowledgement Strategy in TCP RFC 814 (in IPIG) Names, Addresses, Ports, and Routes RFC 816 (in IPIG)
RFC 889 Internet Delay Experiments RFC 896 TCP/IP Congestion Control MIL STD 1778 Military Standard Transmission Control Protocol DEPENDENCIES:
Postel@USC ISIF.ARPA Host Monitoring Protocol (HMP)
This is a good tool for debugging protocol implementations in remotely located computers.
This protocol is used to monitor Internet gateways and the TACs.
Hinden@BBN UNIX.ARPA Cross Net Debugger (XNET)
A debugging protocol, allows debugger like access to remote systems.
This specification should be updated and reissued as an RFC.
ISIF.ARPA "Stub" Exterior Gateway Protocol
The gateway protocol now under development.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
RFC 827, RFC 890 DEPENDENCIES:
The gateway protocol now used in the core gateways.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  IEN 90 COMMENTS:
Defines a capability to combine several segments from different higher level protocols in one IP datagram.
No current experiment in progress.
There is some question as to the extent to which the sharing this protocol envisions can actually take place.
Also, there are some issues about the information captured in the multiplexing header being (a) insufficient, or (b) over specific.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Postel@USC ISIF.ARPA Stream Protocol (ST)
A gateway resource allocation protocol designed for use in multihost real time applications.
The implementation of this protocol has evolved and may no longer be consistent with this specification.
The document should be updated and issued as an RFC.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Defines the procedures for real time voice conferencing.
The specification is an ISI Internal Memo which should be updated and issued as an RFC.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: Internet Protocol, Stream Protocol CONTACT:
Casner@USC ISIB.ARPA Application Level Telnet Protocol (TELNET)
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 854 (in "Internet Telnet Protocol and Options")
The protocol for remote terminal access.
This has been revised since the IPTW.
RFC 764 in IPTW is now obsolete.
MIL STD 1782 Telnet Protocol and Options (TELNET)
General description of options:  RFC 855 (in "Internet Telnet Protocol and Options")
The ITP column indicates if the specification is included in the Internet Telnet Protocol and Options.
The APH column indicates if the specification is included in the ARPANET Protocol Handbook.
The USE column of the table above indicates which options are in general use.
The Binary Transmission, Echo, Suppress Go Ahead, Status, Timing Mark, and Extended Options List options
These are the most frequently implemented options.
The remaining options should be reviewed and the useful ones should be revised and reissued.
The others should be eliminated.
The following are recommended:  Binary Transmission, Echo,
Suppress Go Ahead, Status, Timing Mark, and Extended Options List.
Postel@USC ISIF.ARPA File Transfer Protocol (FTP
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 765 (in IPTW)
The protocol for moving files between Internet hosts.
Provides for access control and negotiation of file parameters.
There are a number of minor corrections to be made.
A major change is the deletion of the mail commands, and a major clarification is needed in the discussion of the management of the data connection.
Also, a suggestion has been made to include some directory manipulation commands (RFC 775).
Even though the MAIL features are defined in this document, they are not to be used.
The SMTP protocol is to be used for all mail service in the Internet.
All FTP implementations must support use of the default data connection ports, and only the User PI may initiate the use of non default ports.
The User PI may specify a non default user side data port with the PORT command.
The User PI may request the server side to identify a non default server side data port with the PASV command.
Reuse of the Data Connection:  When using the stream mode of data transfer the end of the file must be indicated by closing the connection.
This causes a problem if multiple files are to be transfered in the session, due to need for TCP to hold the connection record for a time out period to guarantee the reliable communication.
Thus the connection can not be reopened at once.
There are two solutions to this problem.
The first is to negotiate a non default port (as in (b) above).
The second is to use another transfer mode.
A comment on transfer modes.
The stream transfer mode is inherently unreliable, since one can not determine if the connection closed prematurely or not.
The other transfer modes (Block, Compressed) do not close the connection to indicate the end of file.
They have enough FTP encoding that the data connection can be parsed to determine the end of the file.
Thus using these modes one can leave the data connection open for multiple file transfers.
Why this was not a problem with the old NCP FTP: The NCP was designed with only the ARPANET in mind.
The ARPANET provides very reliable service, and the NCP counted on it.
If any packet of data from an NCP connection were lost or damaged by the network the NCP could not recover.
It is a tribute to the ARPANET designers that the NCP FTP worked so well.
The TCP is designed to provide reliable connections over many different types of networks and interconnections of networks.
TCP must cope with a set of networks that can not promise to work as well as the ARPANET.
TCP must make its own provisions for end to end recovery from lost or damaged packets.
This leads to the need for the connection phase down time out.
The NCP never had to deal with acknowledgements or retransmissions or many other things the TCP must do to make connection reliable in a more complex world.
There is some confusion about the LIST an NLST commands, and what is appropriate to return.
Some clarification and motivation for these commands should be added to the specification.
RFC 678 Document File Format Standards MIL STD 1780 File Transfer Protocol (FTP) DEPENDENCIES:
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 783 (in IPTW)
A very simple file moving protocol, no access control is provided.
No known problems with this specification.
This is in use in several local networks.
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 821 (in "Internet Mail Protocols")
The procedure for transmitting computer mail between hosts.
This has been revised since the IPTW, it is in the "Internet Mail Protocols" volume of November 1982.
RFC 788 (in IPTW) is obsolete.
There have been many misunderstandings and errors in the early implementations.
Some documentation of these problems can be found in the file [ISIF]<SMTP
Some minor differences between RFC 821 and RFC 822 should be resolved.
RFC 822 Mail Header Format Standards
This has been revised since the IPTW, it is in the "Internet Mail Protocols" volume of November 1982.
RFC 733 (in IPTW) is obsolete.
Further revision of RFC 822 is needed to correct some minor errors in the details of the specification.
MIL STD 1781 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
A resource location protocol for use in the ARPA Internet.
This protocol utilizes the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) which in turn calls on the Internet Protocol to deliver its datagrams.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 407 (in APH)
The general protocol for submitting batch jobs and retrieving the results.
Some changes needed for use with TCP.
File Transfer Protocol Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
A special protocol for submitting batch jobs and retrieving the results used with the UCLA IBM OS system.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Braden@USC ISIA.ARPA Official ARPA Internet Protocols
RFC 818 COMMENTS: Provides special access to user Telnet on a remote system.
DEPENDENCIES: Telnet, Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Postel@USC ISIF.ARPA Graphics Protocol (GRAPHICS)
The protocol for vector graphics.
Very minor changes needed for use with TCP.
DEPENDENCIES: Telnet, Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Debugging protocol, sends back whatever you send it.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Debugging protocol, throws away whatever you send it.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Debugging protocol, sends you ASCII data.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol Official ARPA Internet Protocols
Debugging protocol, sends you a short ASCII message.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Postel@USC ISIF.ARPA Active Users Protocol (USERS)
Lists the currently active users.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Postel@USC ISIF.ARPA Finger Protocol (FINGER)
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 742 (in APH)
COMMENTS: Provides information on the current or most recent activity of a user.
Some extensions have been suggested.
Some changes are are needed for TCP.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Postel@USC ISIF.ARPA WhoIs Protocol (NICNAME)
Accesses the ARPANET Directory database.
Provides a way to find out about people, their addresses, phone numbers, organizations, and mailboxes.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
NIC.ARPA Domain Name Protocol (DOMAIN) STATUS:
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  RFC 881, 882,
RFC 897 Domain Name Implementation Schedule DEPENDENCIES:
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 811 (in IPTW)
Accesses the Registered Internet Hosts database (HOSTS.TXT).
Provides a way to find out about a host in the Internet, its Internet Address, and the protocols it implements.
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  IEN 116 (in IPTW)
COMMENTS: Provides machine oriented procedure for translating a host name to an Internet Address.
This specification has significant problems:  1)
The name syntax is out of date.
The protocol details are ambiguous, in particular, the length octet either does or doesn't include itself and the op code.
The extensions are not supported by any known implementation.
Work is in progress on a significant revision.
Further implementations of this protocol are not advised.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  CS DN 2 COMMENTS:
Provides access to the CSNET data base of users to give information about users names, affiliations, and mailboxes.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT: Solomon@UWISC.ARPA
RFC 867 COMMENTS: Provides the day and time in ASCII character string.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
RFC 868 COMMENTS: Provides the time as the number of seconds from a specified reference time.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Postel@USC ISIF.ARPA DCNET Time Server Protocol (CLOCK)
RFC 778 COMMENTS: Provides a mechanism for keeping synchronized clocks.
Mills@USC ISID.ARPA SUPDUP Protocol (SUPDUP)
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 734 (
A special Telnet like protocol for display terminals.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT: Admin.
This is an experimental multimedia mail transfer protocol.
The implementation is called a Message Processing Module or MPM.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
This is an experimental procedure for accessing mailbox services from personal workstations.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 569 COMMENTS:
Describes a simple line editor which could be provided by every Internet host.
ISIF.ARPA Appendices Assigned Numbers    STATUS:
RFC 900 COMMENTS: Describes the fields of various protocols that are assigned specific values for actual use, and lists the currently assigned values.
Issued June 1984, replaces RFC 870, RFC 790 in IPTW, and RFC 820 of January 1983.
RFC 901 Pre emption    STATUS:
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 794 (in IPTW)
Describes how to do pre emption of TCP connections.
None SPECIFICATION:  RFC 795 (in IPTW)
Describes the mapping of the IP type of service field onto the parameters of some specific networks.
Out of date, needs revision.
None SPECIFICATION:  RFC 796 (in IPTW)
Describes the mapping between Internet Addresses and the addresses of some specific networks.
Out of date, needs revision.
RFC 901 Internet Protocol on X.25 Networks    STATUS:
RFC 877 COMMENTS: Describes a standard for the transmission of IP Datagrams over Public Data Networks.
Internet Protocol on DC Networks    STATUS:
RFC 778 DCNET Internet Clock Service CONTACT:  Mills@USC
ISID.ARPA Internet Protocol on Ethernet Networks    STATUS:
RFC 895 COMMENTS: OTHER REFERENCES:
This is a procedure for finding the network hardware address corresponding to an Internet Address.
