Request for Comments Summary RFC Numbers 3000
3099 Status of This Memo
This RFC is a slightly annotated list of the 100 RFCs from RFC 3000 through RFCs 3099.
This is a status report on these RFCs.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
Note Many RFCs, but not all, are Proposed Standards, Draft Standards, or Standards.
Since the status of these RFCs may change during the standards processing, we note here only that they are on the standards track.
Please see the latest edition of "Internet Official Protocol Standards" for the current state and status of these RFCs.
In the following, RFCs on the standards track are marked [STANDARDS  TRACK].
This memo offers useful suggestions for responsible advertising techniques that can be used via the internet in an environment where the advertiser, recipients, and the Internet Community can coexist in a productive and mutually respectful fashion.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo resolves a duplication in the assignment of RSVP Message Types, by changing the Message Types assigned by RFC 2747 to Challenge and Integrity Response messages.
This document contains requirements for robust IP/UDP/RTP (Internet Protocol/User Datagram Protocol/Real Time Transport Protocol)
header compression to be developed by the ROHC (Robust Header Compression) WG.
It is based on the ROHC charter, discussions in the WG, the 3GPP document "3GPP TR 23.922", version 1.0.0 of October 1999, as well as contributions from 3G.IP.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document proposes the interfaces of a Signaling Gateway, which provides interworking between the Switched Circuit Network (SCN) and an IP network.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Internet Transparency via the end to end architecture of the Internet has allowed vast innovation of new technologies and services [1].
However, recent developments in Firewall technology have altered this model and have been shown to inhibit innovation.
We propose the Firewall Enhancement Protocol (FEP) to allow innovation, without violating the security model of a Firewall.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Etymology of "Foo" Approximately 212 RFCs so far, starting with RFC 269, contain the terms `foo', `bar', or `foobar' as metasyntactic variables without any proper explanation or definition.
This document rectifies that deficiency.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo defines a protocol to provide the Pi digit generation service (PIgen) used between clients and servers on host computers.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The definition of a secured zone is presented, clarifying and updating sections of RFC 2535.
RFC 2535 defines a zone to be secured based on a per algorithm basis, e.g., a zone can be secured with RSA keys, and not secured with DSA keys.
This document changes this to define a zone to be secured or not secured regardless of the key algorithm used (or not used).
To further simplify the determination of a zone's status, "experimentally secure" status is deprecated.
A SOCKS based IPv6/IPv4 Gateway Mechanism
This document describes a SOCKS based IPv6/IPv4 gateway mechanism that enables smooth heterogeneous communications between the IPv6 nodes and IPv4 nodes.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
An experimental LDAP referral service
The OpenLDAP Project is operating an experimental LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol)
referral service known as the "OpenLDAP Root Service".
The automated system generates referrals based upon service location information published in DNS SRV RRs (Domain Name System location of services resource records).
This document describes this service.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This memo describes a useful way to conceptualize the use of the standard SIP (Session Initiation Protocol)
Request URI (Uniform Resource Identifier)
that the authors and many members of the SIP community think is suitable as a convention.
It does not define any new protocol with respect to RFC 2543.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document defines and discusses Per Domain Behaviors in detail and lays out the format and required content for contributions to the Diffserv WG on PDBs and the procedure that will be applied for individual PDB specifications to advance as WG products.
This format is specified to expedite working group review of PDB submissions.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes a URN (Uniform Resource Name) namespace for identifying NewsML NewsItems.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes the use of the Common Open Policy Service (COPS) protocol for support of policy provisioning (COPS PR).
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it defines a basic set of managed objects for SNMP based (Simple Network Management Protocol) management of the Baseline Privacy Interface (BPI), which provides data privacy for DOCSIS 1.0
(Data Over  Cable Service Interface Specifications)
compliant Cable Modems and Cable Modem Termination Systems.
This MIB is defined as an extension to the DOCSIS Radio Frequency Interface MIB, RFC 2670.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The Service Location Protocol (SLP) provides mechanisms whereby service agent clients can advertise and user agent clients can query for services.
The design is very much demand driven, so that user agents only obtain service information when they specifically ask for it.
There exists another class of user agent applications, however, that requires notification when a new service appears or disappears.
In the RFC 2608 design, these applications are forced to poll the network to catch changes.
In this document, we describe a protocol for allowing such clients to be notified when a change occurs, removing the need for polling.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
Mapping the BEEP Core onto TCP
This memo describes how a BEEP (Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol) session is mapped onto a single TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) connection.
The Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol Core
This memo describes a generic application protocol kernel for connection oriented, asynchronous interactions called the BEEP (Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol) core.
This document describes the method used to derive initial MPPE session keys from a variety of credential types.
It is expected that this memo will be updated whenever Microsoft defines a new key derivation method for MPPE, since its primary purpose is to provide an open, easily accessible reference for third parties wishing to interoperate with Microsoft products.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
To Point Encryption (MPPE) Protocol
This document describes the use of the Microsoft Point to Point Encryption (MPPE) to enhance the confidentiality of PPP encapsulated packets.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes a mechanism to emulate full bidirectional connectivity between all nodes that are directly connected by a unidirectional link.
This specification describes a method for generating a physical representation, the canonical form, of an XML document that accounts for the permissible changes.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document specifies XML (Extensible Markup Language)
digital signature processing rules and syntax.
This document proposes a method of algorithmic load balancing.
(PFR) application/font tdpfr MIME Sub type Registration
This document describes the registration of the Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) sub type application/font tdpfr.
The encoding is defined by the PFR Specification.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This specification describes an all purpose interchange format for use as a file format or for net working.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document is being published primarily for historical context and comparative purposes, essentially to document some thoughts about how 1591 might have been interpreted and adjusted by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) and ICANN to better reflect today's world while retaining characteristics and policies that have proven to be effective in supporting Internet growth and stability.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Layer Two Tunneling Protocol (L2TP) over Frame Relay
This document describes how L2TP is implemented over Frame Relay Permanent Virtual Circuits (PVCs) and Switched Virtual Circuits (SVCs).
This document introduces the concept of Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN) aggregation as it relates to IPv4 address allocation.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo introduces a "6to4 anycast address" in order to simplify the configuration of 6to4 routers.
It also defines how this address will be used by 6to4 relay routers, how the corresponding "6to4 anycast prefix" will be advertised in the IGP and in the EGP.
The memo documents the reservation by IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority) of the "6to4 relay anycast prefix."
The purpose of the Incident Object Description and Exchange Format is to define a common data format for the description, archiving and exchange of information about incidents between CSIRTs (Computer Security Incident Response Teams) (including alert, incident in investigation, archiving, statistics, reporting, etc.).
This document describes the high level requirements for such a description and exchange format, including the reasons for those requirements.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes a language tag for use in cases where it is desired to indicate the language used in an information object, how to register values for use in this language tag, and a construct for matching such language tags.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
This document describes an extension to BGP which may be used to create a confederation of autonomous systems that is represented as a single autonomous system to BGP peers external to the confederation, thereby removing the "full mesh" requirement.
The intention of this extension is to aid in policy administration and reduce the management complexity of maintaining a large autonomous system.
This document contains a collection of media gateway Channel Associated Signaling (CAS) packages for R1 CAS, North American CAS, CAS PBX interconnect as well as basic FXO support.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This paper presents a simple mechanism, based on "threads", which can be used to prevent Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) from setting up label switched path (LSPs) which have loops.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document describes an LDAP extended operation to allow modification of user passwords which is not dependent upon the form of the authentication identity nor the password storage mechanism used.
A URN Namespace of Object Identifiers
This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace that contains Object Identifiers (OIDs).
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document presents the object oriented information model for representing policy information developed jointly in the IETF Policy Framework WG and as extensions to the Common Information Model (CIM) activity in the Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF).
This document specifies a SLPv2 extension which allows a User Agent (UA) to request a service's attributes be included as an extension to Service Reply messages.
This will eliminate the need for multiple round trip messages for a UA to acquire all service information.
Use of the IDEA Encryption Algorithm in CMS
This memo specifies how to incorporate International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) into CMS or S/MIME as an additional strong algorithm for symmetric encryption.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document defines a protocol for backhauling of ISDN Q.921 User messages over IP using the Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP).
This protocol would be used between a Signaling Gateway (SG) and Media Gateway Controller (MGC).
This memo specifies an optional interim mechanism for IPv6 sites to communicate with each other over the IPv4 network without explicit tunnel setup, and for them to communicate with native IPv6 domains via relay routers.
This memo describes a proposed Management Information Base (MIB) for the PSTN/Internet Interworking (PINT) Services Architecture.
This document specifies a particular application of the Megaco/H.248 Protocol for control of Internet telephones and similar appliances:  the Megaco IP Phone Media Gateway.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The motivation for the development of the tunnel broker model is to help early IPv6 adopters to hook up to an existing IPv6 network (e.g., the 6bone) and to get stable, permanent IPv6 addresses and DNS names.
The concept of the tunnel broker was first presented at Orlando's IETF in December 1998.
Two implementations were demonstrated during the Grenoble IPng & NGtrans interim meeting in February 1999.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The purpose of this document is to explore the problems of defining a Service management framework and to examine some of the issues that still need to be resolved.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes a compression method based on the data compression algorithm described in International Telecommunication Union
This document defines the application of V.44 Packet Method to the Internet Protocol (IP) Payload Compression Protocol (RFC 2393).
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document defines a SIP CGI interface for providing SIP services on a SIP server.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document discusses the implementation of Service Location Protocol (SLP) and session balancing with a TN3270E emulator in a client server implementation with a TN3270E server.
This document describes a framework for the standardization of bulk data reliable multicast transport.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes the payload format for including G.722.1 generated bit streams within an RTP packet.
Also included here are the necessary details for the use of G.722.1 with MIME and SDP.
It is advantageous to use the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) as defined in RFC 2131 to assign customer premise host IP addresses in this environment.
However, a number of security and scaling problems arise with such "public" DHCP use.
This document describes a new DHCP option to address these issues.
This option extends the set of DHCP options as defined in RFC 2132.
This document specifies two Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) attributes, vendorName and vendorVersion that MAY be included in the root DSA specific Entry (DSE) to advertise vendor specific information.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Using The ISSN (International Serial Standard Number) as URN (Uniform Resource Names)
This document presents how the ISSN International Standard Serial Number which is a persistent number for unique identification of serials widely recognised and used in the bibliographic world, can be supported within the Uniform Resource Name (URN) framework as a specific URN namespace identifier.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The Network Solutions Personal Internet Name (PIN):
A URN Namespace for People and Organizations
This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace that is engineered by Network Solutions, Inc. for naming people and organizations.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document proposes a new Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) mechanism that can be used to more effectively recover lost segments when a connection's congestion window is small, or when a large number of segments are lost in a single transmission window.
Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6
This document describes an extension to IPv6 stateless address autoconfiguration for interfaces whose interface identifier is derived from an IEEE identifier.
This memo specifies standard terminology and the taxonomy of web replication and caching infrastructure as deployed today.
It introduces standard concepts, and protocols used today within this application domain.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Public Key Infrastructure Qualified Certificates Profile
This document forms a certificate profile for Qualified Certificates, based on RFC 2459, for use in the Internet.
The goal of this document is to define a general syntax independent of local legal requirements.
This document specifies the procedures for the communication of VCID values between neighboring ATM LSRs that must occur in order to ensure this property.
A fundamental concept in MPLS is that two Label Switching Routers (LSRs) must agree on the meaning of the labels used to forward traffic between and through them.
This common understanding is achieved by using a set of procedures, called a label distribution protocol, by which one LSR informs another of label bindings it has made.
This document describes the applicability of a set of such procedures called LDP (for Label Distribution Protocol) by which LSRs distribute labels to support MPLS forwarding along normally routed paths.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
A fundamental concept in MPLS is that two Label Switching Routers (LSRs) must agree on the meaning of the labels used to forward traffic between and through them.
This common understanding is achieved by using a set of procedures, called a label distribution protocol, by which one LSR informs another of label bindings it has made.
This document defines a set of such procedures called LDP (for Label Distribution Protocol) by which LSRs distribute labels to support MPLS forwarding along normally routed paths.
This document extends and clarifies the relevant portions of RFC 3031 and RFC 3036 by specifying in more detail the procedures which to be used when distributing labels to or from ATM LSRs, when those labels represent Forwarding Equivalence Classes (FECs, see RFC 3031)
for which the routes are determined on a hop by hop basis by network layer routing algorithms.
Use of Label Switching on Frame Relay Networks Specification
This document defines the model and generic mechanisms for Multiprotocol Label Switching on Frame Relay networks.
The Assignment of the Information Field and Protocol Identifier in the Q.2941 Generic Identifier and Q.2957 User to user Signaling for the Internet Protocol
The purpose of this document is to specify the assignment of the information field and protocol identifier in the Q.2941 Generic Identifier and Q.2957 User to user Signaling for the Internet protocol.
This document specifies the encoding to be used by an LSR in order to transmit labeled packets on Point to Point Protocol (PPP) data links, on LAN data links, and possibly on other data links as well.
This document also specifies rules and procedures for processing the various fields of the label stack encoding.
This document specifies the architecture for Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS).
This memo defines two extensions to the SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) service.
This document describes a general Data Validation and Certification Server (DVCS) and the protocols to be used when communicating with it.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document describes a language for filtering e mail messages at time of final delivery.
The purpose of this document is to identify the protocols and applications that break with NAT enroute.
The document also attempts to identify any known workarounds.
This document attempts to capture as much information as possible, but is by no means a comprehensive coverage.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This liaison from WP1/2 to the IETF/ISOC conveys the understandings of the WP1/2 collaborators resulting from the discussions.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document defines two new extensions to Mobile IP.
These extensions will facilitate equipment vendors and organizations to make specific use of these extensions as they see fit for research or deployment purposes.
Reverse Tunneling for Mobile IP, revised This document proposes backwards compatible extensions to Mobile IP to support topologically correct reverse tunnels.
This document does not attempt to solve the problems posed by firewalls located between the home agent and the mobile node's care of address.
This document standardizes five new media types   text/xml, application/xml, text/xml external parsed entity, application/xml  external parsed entity, and application/xml dtd   for use in exchanging network entities that are related to the Extensible Markup Language (XML).
This document also standardizes a convention (using the suffix ' xml') for naming media types outside of these five types when those media types represent XML MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) entities.
The NAT operation described in this document extends address translation introduced in RFC 1631 and includes a new type of network address and TCP/UDP port translation.
In addition, this document corrects the Checksum adjustment algorithm published in RFC 1631 and attempts to discuss NAT operation and limitations in detail.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Using 31 Bit Prefixes on IPv4 Point to Point Links With ever increasing pressure to conserve IP address space on the Internet, it makes sense to consider where relatively minor changes can be made to fielded practice to improve numbering efficiency.
One such change, proposed by this document, is to halve the amount of address space assigned to point to point links (common throughout the Internet infrastructure) by allowing the use of 31 bit subnet masks in a very limited way.
This memo defines a Management Information Base (MIB) for monitoring and controlling a UNI/NNI Multilink Frame Relay Function as defined in Frame Relay Forum FRF.16.
This document defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in Internet Protocol Version 6 internets.
Specifically, this document is the MIB module that defines managed objects for implementations of the Multicast Listener Discovery Protocol [RFC2710].
This document specifies Unified Memory Space Protocol (UMSP), which gives a capability of immediate access to memory of the remote nodes.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document defines the syntax as well as the semantics of the information to be included in the phone book for roaming applications.
This document describes Real Time Transport Protocol
(RTP) payload formats for carrying each of MPEG 4 Audio and MPEG 4 Visual bitstreams without using MPEG 4 Systems.
This document defines the protocol used between elements of a physically decomposed multimedia gateway, i.e. a Media Gateway and a Media Gateway Controller.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes managed objects used for logging Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) Notifications.
The purpose of this document is to express what the engineering community as represented by the IETF expects of Internet Service Providers (ISPs) with respect to security.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
In this specification, we define extensions for the Mobile IP Agent Advertisements and the Registration Request that allow a foreign agent to use a challenge/response mechanism to authenticate the mobile node.
This memo defines a new Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) option for selecting the subnet on which to allocate an address.
version 4 is a distributed file system protocol which owes heritage to NFS protocol versions 2 [RFC1094] and 3 [RFC1813].
Unlike earlier versions, the NFS version 4 protocol supports traditional file access while integrating support for file locking and the mount protocol.
In addition, support for strong security (and its negotiation), compound operations, client caching, and internationalization have been added.
Of course, attention has been applied to making NFS version 4 operate well in an Internet environment.
The RTP (Real time Transport Protocol) payload format for generic forward error correction allows RTP participants to improve loss resiliency through the use of traditional parity based channel codes.
This payload format requires four new MIME types, audio/parityfec, video/parityfec, text/parityfec and application/parityfec.
This document serves as the MIME type registration for those formats.
This document proposes a revised model of Domain Name System Security (DNSSEC) Signing Authority.
The revised model is designed to clarify earlier documents and add additional restrictions to simplify the secure resolution process.
Specifically, this affects the authorization of keys to sign sets of records.
This document proposes a method for performing secure Domain Name System (DNS) dynamic updates.
This specification describes an extension to the TSpec which enables a sender of potentially compressible data to provide hints to int serv routers about the compressibility they may obtain.
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) discussion mailing list furthers the development and specification of Internet technology through discussion of technical issues, and hosts discussions of IETF direction, policy, meetings, and procedures.
As this is the most general IETF mailing list, considerable latitude is allowed.
Advertising, whether to solicit business or promote employment opportunities, falls well outside the range of acceptable topics, as do discussions of a personal nature.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
This option is used by a Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) client to optionally identify the type or category of user or applications it represents.
The information contained in this option is an opaque field that represents the user class of which the client is a member.
Based on this class, a DHCP server selects the appropriate address pool to assign an address to the client and the appropriate configuration parameters.
This option should be configurable by a user.
The audio layers of the MPEG 1 and MPEG 2 standards are in frequent use on the internet, but there is no uniform Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (MIME) type for these files.
The intention of this document is to define the media type audio/mpeg to refer to this kind of contents.
This document provides an overview of a workshop held by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) on wireless internetworking.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
A URN Namespace of Object Identifiers
This document describes a Uniform Resource Names (URN) namespace that contains Object Identifiers (OIDs).
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo contains a snapshot of the state of standardization of protocols used in the Internet as of October 25, 2001.
It lists official protocol standards and Best Current Practice RFCs; it is not a complete index to the RFC series.
The latest version of this memo is designated STD 1.
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
Author's Address Sandy Ginoza University of Southern California Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
Full Copyright Statement Copyright (C)
This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works.
However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than English.
The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS
ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
Acknowledgement Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the Internet Society.
