Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (CLDAP) technical specification, RFC 1798, was published in 1995 as a Proposed Standard.
This document discusses the reasons why the CLDAP technical specification has not been furthered on the Standard Track.
This document recommends that RFC 1798 be moved to Historic status.
Background Connection less Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (CLDAP)
[RFC1798] was published in 1995 as a Proposed Standard.
The protocol was targeted at applications which require lookup of small amounts of information held in the directory.
The protocol avoids the overhead of establishing (and closing) a connection and the session bind and unbind operations needed in connection oriented directory access protocols.
The CLDAP was designed to complement version 2 of the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAPv2)
In the seven years since its publication, CLDAP has not become widely deployed on the Internet.
There are a number of probable reasons for this: Limited functionality:   anonymous only,   read only,   small result sizes only, and Insufficient security capabilities:   no integrity protection,   no confidentiality protection Inadequate internationalization support; Insufficient extensibility; and Lack of multiple independently developed implementations.
The CLDAP technical specification has normative references to multiple obsolete technical specifications including X.501(88), X.511(88), RFC 1487 (the predecessor to RFC 1777, the now Historic LDAPv2 technical specification).
Unless the technical specification were to be updated, CLDAP cannot remain on the standards track because of the Normative reference to a Historic RFC.
The community recognized in the mid 1990s that CLDAP needed to be updated.
In response to this, the IETF chartered the LDAP Extensions Working Group (LDAPext WG) in 1997 to undertake this update.
The LDAPext WG is concluding without producing an update to CLDAP.
Currently, there is no standardization effort to update CLDAP.
It should be noted that the community still has interest in developing a "connection less" directory access protocol.
However, based on operational experience, has determined that further experimentation is necessary to address outstanding technical issues.
In particular, security considerations associated with "connection less" services need to be addressed.
As there is no viable standardization effort to update CLDAP as necessary to keep it on the standards track and the community currently considers this an area requiring further experimentation, RFC 1798 must be moved to Historic status.
It is recommended that those interested in connection less access to X.500 based directory services experiment with [LDAPUDP] and other alternatives which might become available.
The security of the Internet will not be impacted by the retirement of CLDAP.
