As a part of their deliverables, working groups of the IETF may develop BEEP profiles.
During the development process, it is desirable to assign a transient identifier to each profile.
If the profile is subsequently published as an RFC, then a permanent identifier is subsequently assigned by the IANA.
Introduction Each BEEP profile [1] is identified by a URI [2].
The BEEP specification uses URIs to identify a BEEP profile both:  statically, when a profile is formally defined (RFC 3080's Section 5.1); and,  dynamically, during channel management (RFC 3080's Section 2.3.1).
If the BEEP profile appears on the standards track [3], then the IANA is responsible for assigning the URI associated with the BEEP profile.
Otherwise, the entity specifying the BEEP profile is free to assign a URI under its administration to the profile.
If a working group of the IETF is developing a BEEP profile, then, during the development process, it is desirable to use a transient identifier for the profile.
Further, it is desirable that the transient identifier be associated with the working group.
This memo defines the practice for making such an assignment.
Note that this practice does not apply to activities outside of working groups
anyone able to assign a URL is capable of defining a URI for the purposes of identifying the BEEP profiles that they develop.
When a working group is formed, the IETF secretariat assigns a brief mnemonic prefix to the working group, e.g., "provreg" or "sacred".
When a working group begins development of a document which specifies a BEEP profile, the working group chair assigns
a transient identifier of the form "http://iana.org/beep/transient/XXX/YYY" where "XXX" is the working group's mnemonic and "YYY" is a unique string.
Although the resulting URI must conform to the URI syntax, the "YYY" portion is otherwise arbitrary.
For example, it may contain a sub  hierarchy (e.g., "epp/1.0").
For example, http://iana.org/beep/transient/provreg/epp/1.0 http://iana.org/beep/transient/sacred/pdm might be assigned by the chairs of the "provreg" and "sacred" working groups, respectively.
Following this, the working group chair completes a BEEP profile registration template, and submits this information to the IANA.
Note that although the IETF hasn't established a practice with respect to the use of capitalization in URLs employed for namespace purposes, the W3C has a lowercase only policy.
Working group chairs are encouraged to consider this when making assignments.
This document describes an administrative convention and raises no additional security considerations.
Of course, each BEEP based protocol has its own set of security considerations, which should be described in the relevant specification.
The IANA maintains a registry of transient identifiers used for BEEP profiles under development in the IETF, using the profile registration template defined in Section 5.1 of [1].
Note that unlike the registration procedures defined in Appendix B of [1], the working group chair (instead of the IESG) is responsible for authorizing the registration.
