Abstract This document defines a set of Textual Conventions for MIB modules which make use of performance history data based on 15 minute intervals.
In cases where a manager must obtain performance history data about the behavior of equipment it manages several strategies can be followed in the design of a MIB that represents the managed equipment, including: 0
The agent counts events on a continuous basis and, whenever desired, the manager obtains the value of the event counter and adjusts its understanding of the history of events at the agent. 0
The agent allocates events to 'buckets' where each bucket represents an interval of time.
Telecommunications equipment often makes use of the latter strategy.
In particular, for this equipment it is common that history data is maintained by the agent in terms of fifteen minute intervals.
This memo does not attempt to compare the relative merits of different strategies to obtain history data.
Differences may include polling policy, the amount of management traffic between manager and agent, agent simplicity, and 'data currentness' of the data obtained by the manager.
MIB designers should consider these aspects when choosing a particular strategy in a MIB design.
Instead, this memo provides definitions that can be used in MIB modules that require history data based on fifteen minute intervals.
When designing a MIB module, it is often useful to define new types similar to those defined in the SMI [2].
In comparison to a type defined in the SMI, each of these new types has a different name, a similar syntax, but a more precise semantics.
These newly defined types are termed textual conventions, and are used for the convenience of humans reading the MIB module.
This is done through Textual Conventions as defined in RFC1903[1].
It is the purpose of this document to define the set of textual conventions to be used when performance history based on 15 minute intervals is kept.
the Trunk MIB modules [3][4][5].
Note on Invalid Data and Proxy
In this document, the word proxy is meant to indicate an application which receives SNMP messages and replies to them on behalf of the devices where the actual implementation resides, e.g., DS3/E3 interfaces.
The proxy will have already collected the information about the DS3/E3 interfaces into its local database and may not necessarily forward requests to the actual DS3/E3 interface.
It is expected in such an application that there are periods of time where the proxy is not communicating with the DS3/E3 interfaces.
In these instances the proxy will not necessarily have up to date configuration information and will most likely have missed the collection of some data.
Missed data collection may result in some intervals in the interval table being unavailable.
Note on xyzTimeElapsed While xyzTimeElapsed is defined as having a maximum there may be cases (e.g., an adjustment in the system's time of day clock) where the actual value of the current interval would exceed this maximum value.
Suppose that an agent which aligns its 15 minute measurement intervals to 15 minute time of day ("wall clock") boundaries has a time of day clock that systematically gains time, and that a manager periodically corrects the clock by setting it back.
It is assumed that the agent's time of day clock is reasonably accurate, say within a few seconds per day.
Thus, the manager's periodic clock adjustments will normally be small, and if done frequently enough, need not ever exceed 10 seconds.
In this case all interval durations will be within the allowed tolerance and none need be marked invalid,  if  the ANSI procedure of ending measurement intervals at 15 minute time of day boundaries is followed [6].
If the time of day clock is systematically adjusted in small increments, then always ending measurement intervals at 15 minute time of day boundaries will result in the long term in the correct number of intervals with the correct average duration, irrespective of whether the clock is moved ahead or moved back.
Thus, if, for some reason, such as an adjustment in the system's time of day clock, the current interval exceeds the maximum value, it is considered acceptable that the agent will return the maximum value.
The overall constraint on <n> is 1  < n  < 96.
Any additional constraints on n must be defined in the DESCRIPTION clause (e.g., see [5]).
IMPORTS MODULE IDENTITY, Gauge32, mib 2
FROM SNMPv2 SMI TEXTUAL CONVENTION FROM SNMPv2 TC;
perfHistTCMIB MODULE IDENTITY LAST UPDATED "9811071100Z" ORGANIZATION "IETF AToMMIB and TrunkMIB
WGs" CONTACT INFO "Kaj Tesink Postal:
Bellcore 331 Newman Springs Road Red Bank, NJ 07701
This MIB Module provides Textual Conventions to be used by systems supporting 15 minute based performance history counts."
Use of these TCs assumes the following:   0
The agent will keep the following objects.
[ The overall constraint on <n> is 1  < n  < 96; ]
[ Define any additional constraints on <n> here. ]
The value will be <n>
TEXTUAL CONVENTION STATUS  current DESCRIPTION "
A counter associated with a performance measurement in a current 15 minute measurement interval.
The value of this counter starts from zero and is increased when associated events occur, until the end of the 15 minute interval.
At that time the value of the counter is stored in the first 15 minute history interval, and the CurrentCount is restarted at zero.
In the case where the agent has no valid data available for the current interval the corresponding object instance is not available and upon a retrieval request a corresponding error message shall be returned to indicate that this instance does not exist (for example, a noSuchName error for SNMPv1 and a noSuchInstance for SNMPv2 GET operation).
TEXTUAL CONVENTION STATUS  current DESCRIPTION "
A counter associated with a performance measurement in a previous 15 minute measurement interval.
In the case where the agent has no valid data available for a particular interval the corresponding object instance is not available and upon a retrieval request a corresponding error message shall be returned to indicate that this instance does not exist (for example, a noSuchName error for SNMPv1 and a noSuchInstance for SNMPv2 GET operation).
In a system supporting a history of n intervals with IntervalCount(1) and IntervalCount(n)
the most and least recent intervals respectively, the following applies at the end of a 15 minute interval:
discard the value of IntervalCount(n)
the value of IntervalCount(i) becomes that of IntervalCount(i 1) for n
the value of IntervalCount(1) becomes that of CurrentCount the TotalCount, if supported, is adjusted."
TEXTUAL CONVENTION STATUS  current DESCRIPTION "
A counter associated with a performance measurements aggregating the previous valid 15 minute measurement intervals.
(Intervals for which no valid data was available are not counted)" SYNTAX
This memo defines textual conventions for use in other MIB modules.
Security issues for these MIB modules are addressed in the memos defining those modules.
IANA Considerations Prior to publication of this memo as an RFC, IANA is requested to make a suitable OBJECT IDENTIFIER assignment.
