Abstract This document provides supporting documentation to advance the IETF stream's Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse Mode (PIM SM) protocol from Proposed Standard to Internet Standard.
Overview of PIM SM Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse Mode (PIM SM) was first published as [RFC2117] in 1997.
This version was then obsoleted by [RFC2362] in 1998.
The protocol was classified as Experimental in both documents.
The protocol specification was then rewritten in whole and advanced to Proposed Standard as [RFC4601] in 2006.
Considering its multiple independent implementations developed and sufficient successful operational experience gained, the PIM WG decided to advance the PIM SM protocol to Internet Standard.
The conducted survey and this document are part of the work.
Requirements of RFCs 2026 and 6410
[RFC2026] defines the stages in the standardization process, the requirements for moving a document between stages, and the types of documents used during this process.
Section 4.1.2 of [RFC2026] states that: The requirement for at least two independent and interoperable implementations applies to all of the options and features of the specification.
In cases in which one or more options or features have not been demonstrated in at least two interoperable implementations, the specification may advance to the Draft Standard level only if those options or features are removed.
[RFC6410] updates the IETF Standards Process defined in [RFC2026].
Primarily, it reduces the Standards Process from three Standards Track maturity levels to two.
The second maturity level is a combination of Draft Standard and Standard as specified in [RFC2026].
Section 2.2 of [RFC6410] states that: (1) There are at least two independent interoperating implementations with widespread deployment and successful operational experience.
(3) There are no unused features in the specification that greatly increase implementation complexity.
Optional features that do not meet the aforesaid criteria have been identified by the PIM Working Group and will be removed.
This document provides supporting documentation to advance the IETF stream's Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse Mode (PIM SM) protocol from Proposed Standard to Internet Standard.
Survey on Implementations and Deployments 2.1.
Methodology A questionnaire was issued by the PIM WG
co chairs and announced widely to the vendors and operational community to obtain information on PIM SM implementations and deployments.
The survey concluded on 22 Oct 2012.
The responses remain confidential and only combined results are published here, while responders chose whether to keep their affiliations confidential.
The raw questionnaire is shown in Appendix A, and a compilation of the responses is included in the following section.
Nine operators responded to the survey.
They are SWITCH, National Research Council Canada, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Motorola Solutions, and five anonymous operators.
Description of PIM SM Deployments Since 1998, PIM SM has been deployed for a wide variety of applications: Campus, Enterprise, Research and WAN networks, Broadband ISP, and Digital TV.
There are five deployments based on [RFC4601] implementations and two on [RFC2362] implementations.
PIM  SM for IPv6 has been deployed by three operators.
Out of the nine operators, six have deployed PIM SM implementations from multiple vendors.
Operators reported minor interoperability issues and these were addressed by the vendors.
There was no major interoperability concern reported by the operators.
PIM SM Deployment with Other Multicast Technologies
Except for one deployment of PIM SM with Multicast Extensions to OSPF (MOSPF), all other operators have deployed PIM SM exclusively.
PIM SM Rendezvous Points (RPs) and RP Discovery Mechanisms
The number of PIM SM RPs deployed by operators ranges from a few (e.g., sixteen) to a massively scaled number (four hundred).
Both static configuration and Bootstrap Router (BSR) have been deployed as RP discovery mechanisms.
Anycast RP has been deployed for RP redundancy.
Two operators have deployed Anycast RP using the Multicast Source Discovery Protocol (MSDP)
Three operators have deployed Anycast RP using both MSDP [RFC3446] and PIM [RFC4610] for different scenarios.
The best common practice seems to be to use static RP configuration with Anycast RP for redundancy.
Eight vendors reported PIM SM implementations.
They are XORP, Huawei Technologies, Cisco Systems, Motorola Solutions, Juniper Networks, and three other anonymous vendors.
Implementations Based on RFCs 4601 and 2362 Four vendors reported PIM SM implementations based on [RFC4601] and two reported PIM SM implementations based on [RFC2362].
Two other reported implementations are hybrids.
Minor interoperability issues have been addressed by the vendors over the years and no concerns were reported by any vendor.
Similarly, most vendors have also not implemented PMBR due to lack of deployment requirements or because it was considered too complex and non scalable.
and they were implemented just because these were part of the [RFC4601] specification.
Implementations of Other Features of RFC 4601
Most vendors have implemented all of the following from the [RFC4601] specification:  Source Specific Multicast (SSM)
Explicit tracking  Register mechanism  Shortest Path Tree (SPT)
switchover at last hop router  Assert mechanism
Hashing of group to RP mappings
Some vendors do not implement explicit tracking and SSM.
Key Findings PIM SM has been widely implemented and deployed for different applications.
The protocol is sufficiently well specified in [RFC4601] resulting in interoperable implementation deployed by operators.
Hence, it is necessary to remove these features from the specification as required by [RFC2026] and [RFC6410].
The PIM WG is aware of at least three (and believes there are more)
PIM SM implementations that support the use of IPsec to protect PIM messages.
For at least one of them, IPsec is not part of the PIM implementation itself
one just configures IPsec with Security Policy Databases (SPDs) where interface, the ALL PIM ROUTERS multicast address, etc., can be used as selectors, according to [RFC5796].
This section provides copies of the questionnaires exactly as distributed to operators and implementors.
PIM Survey for Operators Introduction:
PIM SM was first published as RFC2117 in 1997 and then again as RFC2362 in 1998.
The protocol was classified as Experimental in both of these documents.
The PIM SM protocol specification was then rewritten in whole and advanced to Proposed Standard as RFC4601 in 2006.
Considering the multiple independent implementations developed and the successful operational experience gained, the IETF has decided to advance the PIM SM routing protocol to Draft Standard.
This survey intends to provide supporting documentation to advance the Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse Mode (PIM SM) routing protocol from IETF Proposed Standard to Draft Standard.
(Due to RFC6410, now the intention is to progress it to Internet Standard.
Draft Standard is no longer used.)
This survey is issued on behalf of the IETF PIM Working Group.
The responses will be collected by a neutral third party and kept strictly confidential if requested in the response; only the final combined results will be published.
Tim Chown and Bill Atwood have agreed to anonymize the response to this Questionnaire.
They have a long experience with multicast but have no direct financial interest in this matter, nor ties to any of the vendors involved.
Tim is working at University of Southampton, UK, and he has been active in the IETF for many years, including the mboned working group, and he is a co chair of the 6renum working group.
Bill is at Concordia University, Montreal, Canada, and he has been an active participant in the IETF pim working group for over ten years, especially in the area of security.
Please send questionnaire responses addressed to them both.
The addresses are tjc@ecs.soton.ac.uk and william.atwood@concordia.ca.
Please include the string "RFC4601 bis Questionnaire" in the subject field.
Before answering the questions, please complete the following background information.
Name of the Respondent: Affiliation/Organization:
Provide description of PIM deployment: Do you wish to keep the information provided confidential:
Questions: 1 Have you deployed PIM SM in your network?
How long have you had PIM SM deployed in your network?
Do you know if your deployment is based on the most recent RFC4601?
Have you deployed PIM SM for IPv6 in your network?
Are you using equipment with different (multi vendor)
PIM SM implementations for your deployment?
Have you encountered any inter operability or backward  compatibility issues amongst differing implementations?
If yes, what are your concerns about these issues?
Have you deployed both dense mode and sparse mode in your network?
To what extent have you deployed PIM functionality, like BSR, SSM, and Explicit Tracking?
Which RP mapping mechanism do you use: Static, AutoRP, or BSR?
How many RPs have you deployed in your network?
If you use Anycast RP, is it Anycast RP using MSDP (RFC 3446) or Anycast RP using PIM (RFC4610)?
Do you have any other comments on PIM SM deployment in your network?
PIM Survey for Implementors Introduction:
PIM SM was first published as RFC2117 in 1997 and then again as RFC2362 in 1998.
The protocol was classified as Experimental in both of these documents.
The PIM SM protocol specification was then rewritten in whole and advanced to Proposed Standard as RFC4601 in 2006.
Considering the multiple independent implementations developed and the successful operational experience gained, the IETF has decided to advance the PIM SM routing protocol to Draft Standard.
This survey intends to provide supporting documentation to advance the Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse Mode (PIM SM) routing protocol from IETF Proposed Standard to Draft Standard.
(Due to RFC6410, now the intention is to progress it to Internet Standard.
Draft Standard is no longer used.)
This survey is issued on behalf of the IETF PIM Working Group.
The responses will be collected by a neutral third party and kept strictly confidential if requested in the response; only the final combined results will be published.
Tim Chown and Bill Atwood have agreed to anonymize the response to this Questionnaire.
They have a long experience with multicast but have no direct financial interest in this matter, nor ties to any of the vendors involved.
Tim is working at University of Southampton, UK, and he has been active in the IETF for many years, including the mboned working group, and he is a co chair of the 6renum working group.
Bill is at Concordia University, Montreal, Canada, and he has been an active participant in the IETF pim working group for over ten years, especially in the area of security.
Please send questionnaire responses addressed to them both.
The addresses are tjc@ecs.soton.ac.uk and william.atwood@concordia.ca.
Please include the string "RFC 4601 bis Questionnaire" in the subject field.
Before answering the questions, please complete the following background information.
Name of the Respondent: Affiliation/Organization:
Provide description of PIM implementation: Do you wish to keep the information provided confidential:
Have you implemented PIM SM?
Is the PIM SM implementation based on RFC2362 or RFC4601?
Have you implemented the PMBR as specified in RFC4601 and RFC2715?
What is the rationale behind implementing or omitting PMBR?
Have you implemented other features and functions of RFC4601:
SSM Join Suppression Explicit tracking Register mechanism SPT switchover at last hop router Assert mechanism
Hashing of group to RP mappings 6
Does your PIM SM implementation support IPv6?
Have you encountered any inter operability issues with other PIM implementations in trials or in the field?
Do you have any other comments or concerns about PIM SM as specified in RFC4601?
