Abstract This memo specifies Microsoft's Windows 2000 Kerberos change password and set password protocols.
The Windows 2000 Kerberos change password protocol interoperates with the original Kerberos
Change password is a request reply protocol that includes a KRB PRIV message that contains the new password for the user.
Introduction Microsoft's Windows 2000 Kerberos change password protocol interoperates with the original Kerberos
Change password is a request reply protocol that includes a KRB PRIV message that contains the new password for the user.
The original change password protocol does not allow an administrator to set a password for a new user.
This functionality is useful in some environments, and this proposal extends the change password protocol to allow password setting.
The changes are: adding new fields to the request message to indicate the principal which is having its password set, not requiring the initial flag in the service ticket, using a new protocol version number, and adding three new result codes.
The service accepts requests on UDP port 464 and TCP port 464 as well.
The protocol consists of a single request message followed by a single reply message.
For UDP transport, each message must be fully contained in a single UDP packet.
For TCP transport, there is a 4 octet header in network byte order that precedes the message and specifies the length of the message.
All 16 bit fields are in big endian order.
message length field: contains the number of bytes in the message including this field.
protocol version number: contains the hex constant 0xff80
AP REQ length: length of AP REQ data, in bytes.
If the length is zero, then the last field contains a KRB ERROR message instead of a KRB PRIV message.
The AP REQ message must be for the service principal kadmin
/changepw@REALM, where REALM is the REALM of the user who wishes to change/set his password.
The authenticator in the AP  REQ must include a subsession key.
The subsession key must be pseudo randomly generated and must never be reused for multiple authenticators.)
To enable setting of passwords, it is not required that the initial flag be set in the Kerberos service ticket.
KRB PRIV message (see [1])
This user data field in the KRB PRIV message is encrypted using the subkey from the authenticator in the AP REQ data.
The usec and seq number fields of the KRB PRIV message are present and have the same value as the seq number field in the authenticator from the AP REQ message (the seq number in the authenticator will be present).
The server ignores the optional r address field in the KRB PRIV message, if it is present.
The user data component of the message consists of the following ASN.1 structure encoded as an OCTET STRING:
The server must verify the AP REQ message, check whether the client principal in the ticket is authorized to set/change the password (either for that principal, or for the principal in the targname field if present), and decrypt the new password.
The server also checks whether the initial flag is required for this request, replying with status 0x0007
if it is not set and should be.
An authorization failure is cause to respond with status 0x0005.
For forward compatibility, the server should be prepared to ignore fields after targrealm in the structure that it does not understand.
The newpasswd field contains the cleartext password, and the server will apply any local policy checks including password policy checks.
The server then generates the appropriate keytypes from the password and stores them in the KDC database.
If all goes well, status 0x0000 is returned to the client in the reply message (see below).
All 16 bit fields are in big endian order.
message length field: contains the number of bytes in the message including this field.
protocol version number: contains the hex constant 0x0001
(The reply message has the same format as the original change password protocol.)
AP REP length: length of AP REP data, in bytes.
If the length is zero, then the last field contains a KRB ERROR message instead of a KRB PRIV message.
: the AP REP is the response to the AP REQ in the request packet.
This KRB PRIV message must be encrypted with the subsession key from the authenticator in the AP REQ data.
The server will respond with a KRB PRIV message unless it cannot decode the client AP REQ or KRB PRIV message, in which case it will respond with a KRB ERROR message.
Unlike change password version 1, the KRB ERROR message will be sent back without any encapsulation.
The user data component of the KRB PRIV message, or e data component of the KRB ERROR message, consists of the following data. 0
(result codes 0 4 are from the original change password protocol):
The result code must have one of the following values (big endian integer): KRB5 KPASSWD
5 requestor not authorized KRB5 KPASSWD
6 protocol version unsupported KRB5 KPASSWD
INITIAL FLAG NEEDED 7 initial flag required 0xFFFF is returned if the request fails for some other reason.
Although only a few non zero result codes are specified here, the client should accept any non zero result code as indicating failure.
result string: This field contains information which might be useful to the user, such as feedback about policy failures.
The string is encoded in UTF 8.
It may be omitted if the server does not wish to include it.
If it is present, the client will display the string to the user.
Security Considerations Password policies should be enforced to make sure that users do not pick passwords (for change password) that are vulnerable to brute force password guessing attacks.
An administrator who is authorized to set other principal's passwords is highly trusted and must also carefully protect his/her own credentials.
