Request for Comments Summary RFC Numbers 3200
3299 Status of This Memo
This RFC is a slightly annotated list of the 100 RFCs from RFC 3200 through RFC 3299.
This is a status report on these RFCs.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
Note Many RFCs, but not all, are Proposed Standards, Draft Standards, or Standards.
Since the status of these RFCs may change during the standards processing, we note here only that they are on the standards track.
Please see the latest edition of "Internet Official Protocol Standards" for the current state and status of these RFCs.
In the following, RFCs on the standards track are marked [STANDARDS TRACK].
This document describes the SPIRITS protocol requirements, based on the architecture presented in RFC 3136.
(SPIRITS stands for "Service in the PSTN/IN Requesting InTernet Service".)
The purpose of the protocol is to support services that originate in the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) and necessitate the interactions between the PSTN and the Internet.
Similarly, such services are called SPIRITS services.
(Internet Call Waiting, Internet Caller ID Delivery, and Internet Call Forwarding are examples of SPIRIT services, but the protocol is to define the building blocks from which many other services can be built.)
On the PSTN side, the SPIRITS services are initiated from the Intelligent Network (IN) entities; the earlier IETF work on the PSTN/Internet Interworking (PINT) resulted in the protocol (RFC 2848) in support of the services initiated the other way around from the Internet to PSTN.
To this end, this document lists general requirements for the SPIRITS protocol as well as those pertinent to IN, Wireless IN, and PINT building blocks.
The document also presents the SPIRITS WG consensus on the choice of the SPIRITS signaling protocol.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document details schema and protocol elements for representing and managing named subordinate references in Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) Directories.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for the use with the network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes managed objects for the General Switch Management Protocol (GSMP).
This memo provides an overview of the GSMP (General Switch Management Protocol) and includes information relating to its deployment in a IP network in an MPLS environment.
It does not discuss deployment in an ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode) network or in a raw ethernet configuration.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Packet Encapsulations for Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), Ethernet and Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
This memo specifies the encapsulation of GSMP (General Switch Management Protocol) packets in ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode), Ethernet and TCP (Transmission Control Protocol).
This document describes the General Switch Management Protocol Version 3 (GSMPv3).
The GSMPv3 is an asymmetric protocol that allows one or more external switch controllers to establish and maintain the state of a label switch such as, an ATM, frame relay or MPLS switch.
The GSMPv3 allows control of both unicast and multicast switch connection state as well as control of switch system resources and QoS features.
This MIB module defines textual conventions to represent commonly used Internet network layer addressing information.
The intent is that these textual conventions (TCs) will be imported and used in MIB modules that would otherwise define their own representations.
This document proposes an informal management model of Differentiated Services (Diffserv) routers for use in their management and configuration.
This model defines functional datapath elements (e.g., classifiers, meters, actions, marking, absolute dropping, counting, multiplexing), algorithmic droppers, queues and schedulers.
It describes possible configuration parameters for these elements and how they might be interconnected to realize the range of traffic conditioning and per hop behavior (PHB) functionalities described in the Diffserv Architecture.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo describes an SMIv2 (Structure of Management Information version 2) MIB for a device implementing the Differentiated Services Architecture.
It may be used both for monitoring and configuration of a router or switch capable of Differentiated Services functionality.
Using the Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) in Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol (BEEP)
This memo specifies a Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP)
binding to the Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol core (BEEP).
A SOAP binding describes how SOAP messages are transmitted in the network.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes managed objects used for monitoring Differentiated Services (DS)
Codepoint usage in packets which contain a DS field, utilizing the monitoring framework defined in the RMON 2
(Remote Network Monitoring Management Version 2) MIB.
This document provides a high level introduction to the capabilities supported by the Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP).
It is intended as a guide for potential users of SCTP as a general purpose transport protocol.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Using Microsoft Word to create Internet Drafts and RFCs
This document describes the steps to configure the Microsoft Word application to produce documents in Internet Draft and RFC format.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The VCDIFF Generic Differencing and Compression Data Format
This memo describes VCDIFF, a general, efficient and portable data format suitable for encoding compressed and/or differencing data so that they can be easily transported among computers.
This document describes the various Internet calendaring and scheduling standards and works in progress, and the relationships between them.
Its intent is to provide a context for these documents, assist in their understanding, and potentially aid in the design of standards based calendaring and scheduling systems.
The standards addressed are RFC 2445 (iCalendar), RFC 2446 (iTIP), and RFC 2447 (iMIP).
The work in progress addressed is "Calendar Access Protocol" (CAP).
This document also describes issues and problems that are not solved by these protocols, and that could be targets for future work.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document defines a "Content language:" header, for use in cases where one desires to indicate the language of something that has RFC 822 like headers, like MIME body parts or Web documents, and an "Accept Language:" header for use in cases where one wishes to indicate one's preferences with regard to language.
This specification defines a profile for the use of X.509 Attribute Certificates in Internet Protocols.
Attribute certificates may be used in a wide range of applications and environments covering a broad spectrum of interoperability goals and a broader spectrum of operational and assurance requirements.
The goal of this document is to establish a common baseline for generic applications requiring broad interoperability as well as limited special purpose requirements.
The profile places emphasis on attribute certificate support for Internet electronic mail, IPSec, and WWW security applications.
Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile
This memo profiles the X.509 v3 certificate and X.509 v2 Certificate Revocation List (CRL) for use in the Internet.
This document specifies algorithm identifiers and ASN.1 encoding formats for digital signatures and subject public keys used in the Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure (PKI).
Digital signatures are used to sign certificates and certificate revocation list (CRLs).
Certificates include the public key of the named subject.
This document describes how to use Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC)
public key algorithms in the Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS).
The ECC algorithms support the creation of digital signatures and the exchange of keys to encrypt or authenticate content.
The definition of the algorithm processing is based on the ANSI X9.62 standard, developed by the ANSI X9F1 working group, the IEEE 1363 standard, and the SEC 1 standard.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes a simple, interoperable mechanism that can be employed in Intermediate System to Intermediate System
(IS IS) networks in order to decrease the data loss associated with deterministic blackholing of packets during transient network conditions.
The mechanism proposed here requires no IS IS protocol changes and is completely interoperable with the existing IS IS specification.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
High Speed Digital Subscriber Line (SHDSL)
This document defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) module for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes objects used for managing High Bit Rate DSL 2nd generation (HDSL2) and Single Pair High Speed Digital Subscriber Line (SHDSL) interfaces.
XML Signature Syntax and Processing
This document specifies XML (Extensible Markup Language)
digital signature processing rules and syntax.
This document defines a format for using compressed data as a Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS) content type.
Compressing data before transmission provides a number of advantages, including the elimination of data redundancy which could help an attacker, speeding up processing by reducing the amount of data to be processed by later steps (such as signing or encryption), and reducing overall message size.
Although there have been proposals for adding compression at other levels (for example at the MIME or SSL level), these don't address the problem of compression of CMS content unless the compression is supplied by an external means (for example by intermixing MIME and CMS).
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in TCP/IP based internets.
In particular, it defines objects for managing remote network monitoring (RMON) devices for use on high speed networks.
This document contains a MIB Module that defines these new objects and also contains definitions of some updated objects from the RMON MIB in RFC 2819 and the RMON2 MIB in RFC 2021.
This memo describes the principles of Traffic Engineering (TE) in the Internet.
The document is intended to promote better understanding of the issues surrounding traffic engineering in IP networks, and to provide a common basis for the development of traffic engineering capabilities for the Internet.
The principles, architectures, and methodologies for performance evaluation and performance optimization of operational IP networks are discussed throughout this document.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The Internet is for Everyone This document expresses the Internet Society's ideology that the Internet really is for everyone.
However, it will only be such  if we make it so.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document defines a flexible solution for support of Differentiated Services (Diff Serv) over Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) networks.
(RMT) Building Blocks and Protocol Instantiation documents This document provides general guidelines to assist the authors of Reliable Multicast Transport (RMT) building block and protocol instantiation definitions.
The purpose of these guidelines is to ensure that any building block and protocol instantiation definitions produced contain sufficient information to fully explain their operation and use.
In addition these guidelines provide directions to specify modular and clearly defined RMT building blocks and protocol instantiations that can be refined and augmented to safely create new protocols for use in new scenarios for which any existing protocols were not designed.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document proposes several new ciphersuites.
At present, the symmetric ciphers supported by Transport Layer Security (TLS) are RC2, RC4, International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA), Data Encryption Standard (DES), and triple DES.
The protocol would be enhanced by the addition of Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) ciphersuites.
Payload Format and File Storage Format for the Adaptive Multi Rate (AMR) and Adaptive Multi Rate Wideband (AMR WB)
This document specifies a real time transport protocol (RTP) payload format to be used for Adaptive Multi Rate (AMR) and Adaptive Multi Rate Wideband (AMR WB) encoded speech signals.
The payload format is designed to be able to interoperate with existing AMR and AMR WB transport formats on non IP networks.
In addition, a file format is specified for transport of AMR and AMR WB speech data in storage mode applications such as email.
Two separate MIME type registrations are included, one for AMR and one for AMR WB, specifying use of both the RTP payload format and the storage format.
This document describes the use of Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) addresses in conjunction with the Session Description Protocol (SDP).
Specifically, this document clarifies existing text in SDP with regards to the syntax of IPv6 addresses.
This document describes an extension to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).
The purpose of this extension is to provide an extensible framework by which SIP nodes can request notification from remote nodes indicating that certain events have occurred.
This document defines a mechanism by which two entities can make use of the Session Description Protocol (SDP) to arrive at a common view of a multimedia session between them.
In the model, one participant offers the other a description of the desired session from their perspective, and the other participant answers with the desired session from their perspective.
This offer/answer model is most useful in unicast sessions where information from both participants is needed for the complete view of the session.
The offer/answer model is used by protocols like the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).
The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) uses DNS procedures to allow a client to resolve a SIP Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) into the IP address, port, and transport protocol of the next hop to contact.
It also uses DNS to allow a server to send a response to a backup client if the primary client has failed.
This document describes those DNS procedures in detail.
This document specifies an extension to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) providing reliable provisional response messages.
This extension uses the option tag 100rel and defines the Provisional Response ACKnowledgement (PRACK) method.
This document describes Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), an application layer control (signaling) protocol for creating, modifying, and terminating sessions with one or more participants.
These sessions include Internet telephone calls, multimedia distribution, and multimedia conferences.
This memo captures Diffserv working group agreements concerning new and improved terminology, and provides minor technical clarifications.
It is intended to update RFC 2474, RFC 2475 and RFC 2597.
When RFCs 2474 and 2597 advance on the standards track, and RFC 2475 is updated, it is intended that the revisions in this memo will be incorporated, and that this memo will be obsoleted by the new RFCs.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The local Message Bus (Mbus) is a light weight message oriented coordination protocol for group communication between application components.
The Mbus provides automatic location of communication peers, subject based addressing, reliable message transfer and different types of communication schemes.
The protocol is layered on top of IP multicast and is specified for IPv4 and IPv6.
The IP multicast scope is limited to link local multicast.
This document specifies the Mbus protocol, i.e., message syntax, addressing and transport mechanisms.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The primary motivation for the development and deployment of these practices is to increase the distribution of Domain Name System (DNS) servers to previously under  served areas of the network topology and to reduce the latency for DNS query responses in those areas.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes the applicability of the Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP).
It also contrasts SCTP with the two dominant transport protocols, User Datagram Protocol (UDP) & Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), and gives some guidelines for when best to use SCTP and when not best to use SCTP.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The DOCSIS (Data Over Cable Service Interface Specifications)
Device Class DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol)
Relay Agent Information Sub option
This document proposes a new sub option to the DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol) Relay Agent Information Option.
For example, a reference to this document would give one the power to agree that the DNS (Domain Name System) is a global lookup repository with perimeter integrity and loose, converging consistency.
On the other hand, a LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) directory server is a local, centralized repository with both lookup and search capability.
This document discusses one group of such systems which is known under the term, "directories".
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document specifies a set of methods, headers, and resource types that define the WebDAV (Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning) versioning extensions to the HTTP/1.1 protocol.
Binary Lexical Octet Ad hoc Transport
This document defines a reformulation of IP and two transport layer protocols (TCP and UDP) as XML applications.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
1 April 2002    Electricity over IP Mostly Pointless Lamp Switching (MPLampS) is an architecture for carrying electricity over IP (with an MPLS control plane).
According to our marketing department, MPLampS has the potential to dramatically lower the price, ease the distribution and usage, and improve the manageability of delivering electricity.
This document is motivated by such work as SONET/SDH over IP/MPLS (with apologies to the authors).
Readers of the previous work have been observed scratching their heads and muttering, "What next?".
This document answers that question.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Tag Image File Format Fax eXtended
(TIFF FX) image/tiff fx MIME Sub type Registration
This document describes the registration of the MIME sub type image/tiff fx.
The encodings are defined by File Format for Internet Fax and its extensions.
Implementers Guide for Facsimile Using Internet Mail
This document is intended for the implementers of software that use email to send to facsimiles using RFC 2305 and 2532.
This is an informational document and its guidelines do not supersede the referenced documents.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
A Delay Bound alternative revision of RFC 2598 For historical interest
, this document captures the EF Design Team's proposed solution, preferred by the original authors of RFC 2598 but not adopted by the working group in December 2000.
The original definition of EF was based on comparison of forwarding on an unloaded network.
This experimental Delay Bound (DB)
PHB requires a bound on the delay of packets due to other traffic in the network.
At the Pittsburgh IETF meeting in August 2000, the Differentiated Services working group faced serious questions regarding RFC 2598 the group's standards track definition of the Expedited Forwarding (EF) Per Hop Behavior (PHB).
An 'EF Design Team' volunteered to develop a re expression of RFC 2598, bearing in mind the issues raised in the DiffServ group.
At the San Diego IETF meeting in December 2000 the DiffServ working group decided to pursue an alternative re expression of the EF PHB.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document was written during the process of clarification of RFC2598 "An Expedited Forwarding PHB" that led to the publication of revised specification of EF "An Expedited Forwarding PHB".
Its primary motivation is providing additional explanation to the revised EF definition and its properties.
The document also provides additional implementation examples and gives some guidance for computation of the numerical parameters of the new definition for several well known schedulers and router architectures.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
An Expedited Forwarding PHB (Per Hop Behavior)
This document defines a PHB (per hop behavior) called Expedited Forwarding (EF).
The PHB is a basic building block in the Differentiated Services architecture.
EF is intended to provide a building block for low delay, low jitter and low loss services by ensuring that the EF aggregate is served at a certain configured rate.
This document obsoletes RFC 2598.
The History and Context of Telephone Number Mapping (ENUM)
Operational Decisions: Informational Documents Contributed to ITU T Study Group 2
(SG2) RFC 2916 assigned responsibility for a number of administrative and operational details of Telephone Number Mapping (ENUM) to the IAB.
It also anticipated that ITU would take responsibility for determining the legitimacy and appropriateness of applicants for delegation of "country code" level subdomains of the top level ENUM domain.
Recently, three memos have been prepared for the ITU T Study Group 2 (SG2) to explain the background of, and reasoning for, the relevant decisions.
The IAB has also supplied a set of procedural instructions to the RIPE NCC for implementation of their part of the model.
The content of the three memos is provided in this document for the information of the IETF community.
This memo specifies Microsoft's Windows 2000 Kerberos change password and set password protocols.
The Windows 2000 Kerberos change password protocol interoperates with the original Kerberos
Change password is a request reply protocol that includes a KRB PRIV message that contains the new password for the user.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document contains requirements for the 0 byte IP/UDP/RTP (Internet Protocol/User Datagram Protocol/Real Time Transport Protocol) header compression scheme to be developed by the Robust Header Compression (ROHC) Working Group.
It also includes the basic assumptions for the typical link layers over which 0 byte compression may be implemented, and assumptions about its usage in general.
This document defines a ROHC (Robust Header Compression) profile for compression of IP/UDP/RTP (Internet Protocol/User Datagram Protocol/Real Time Transport Protocol) packets, utilizing functionality provided by the lower layers to increase compression efficiency by completely eliminating the header for most packets during optimal operation.
The profile is built as an extension to the ROHC RTP profile.
It defines additional mechanisms needed in ROHC, states requirements on the assisting layer to guarantee transparency, and specifies general logic for compression and decompression making use of this header free packet.
Robust Header Compression (ROHC) over PPP This document describes an option for negotiating the use of robust header compression (ROHC) on IP datagrams transmitted over the Point  to Point Protocol (PPP).
It defines extensions to the PPP Control Protocols for IPv4 and IPv6.
This document describes the registration of the MIME sub type application/dicom (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine).
The baseline encoding is defined by the DICOM Standards Committee in "Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine".
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document specifies the requirements and uses cases for some optional administrative operations for use with the Internet Printing Protocol (IPP) version 1.0 and version 1.1.
Some of these administrative operations operate on the IPP Job and Printer objects.
The remaining operations operate on a new Device object that more closely models a single output device.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document includes comments and recommendations by the IAB on some architectural and policy issues related to the chartering of Open Pluggable Edge Services (OPES) in the IETF.
OPES are services that would be deployed at application level intermediaries in the network, for example, at a web proxy cache between the origin server and the client.
These intermediaries would transform or filter content, with the explicit consent of either the content provider or the end user.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document defines a basic set of requirements for reliable server pooling.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The 'application/xhtml xml' Media Type
This document defines the 'application/xhtml xml' MIME media type for XHTML based markup languages; it is not intended to obsolete any previous IETF documents, in particular RFC 2854 which registers 'text/html'.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document discusses those things that application designers might wish to consider when designing new protocols.
While many common Internet applications will operate cleanly in the presence of Network Address Translators, others suffer from a variety of problems when crossing these devices.
Guidelines are presented herein to help ensure new protocols and applications will, to the extent possible, be compatible with NAT (Network Address Translation).
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document is intended as part of an IETF discussion about "middleboxes" defined as any intermediary box performing functions apart from normal, standard functions of an IP router on the data path between a source host and destination host.
This document establishes a catalogue or taxonomy of middleboxes, cites previous and current IETF work concerning middleboxes, and attempts to identify some preliminary conclusions.
It does not, however, claim to be definitive.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document gives a more concrete definition of "the IETF" as it understood today.
Many RFCs refer to "the IETF".
Many important IETF documents speak of the IETF as if it were an already defined entity.
However, no IETF document correctly defines what the IETF is.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
RFC 1700 is Replaced by an On line Database
This memo obsoletes RFC 1700
(STD 2) "Assigned Numbers", which contained an October 1994 snapshot of assigned Internet protocol parameters.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes a set of managed objects that are used to schedule management operations periodically or at specified dates and times.
However, this is specifically defined to cover the body of the actual message, not the contents of the full file (which might be quite different, if the response is a Content Range, or uses a delta encoding).
Also, the Content MD5 is limited to one specific digest algorithm; other algorithms, such as SHA 1 (Secure Hash Standard), may be more appropriate in some circumstances.
Finally, HTTP/1.1 provides no explicit mechanism by which a client may request a digest.
This document proposes HTTP extensions that solve these problems.
IANA Considerations for IPv4 Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP)
This memo requests that the IANA create a registry for fields in the IGMP (Internet Group Management Protocol) protocol header, and provides guidance for the IANA to use in assigning parameters for those fields.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
The purpose of this document is to provide System Administrators with guidelines on the collection and archiving of evidence relevant to such a security incident.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
IPv6 A6 aware server/resolver message size requirements This document mandates support for EDNS0 (Extension Mechanisms for DNS) in DNS entities claiming to support either DNS Security Extensions or A6 records.
This requirement is necessary because these new features increase the size of DNS messages.
If EDNS0 is not supported fall back to TCP
will happen, having a detrimental impact on query latency and DNS server load.
This document updates RFC 2535 and RFC 2874, by adding new requirements.
In order to deploy DNSSEC (Domain Name System Security Extensions) operationally, DNSSEC aware servers should only perform automatic inclusion of DNSSEC RRs when there is an explicit indication that the resolver can understand those RRs.
This document proposes the use of a bit in the EDNS0 header to provide that explicit indication and describes the necessary protocol changes to implement that notification.
Vendor Extensions for Service Location Protocol, Version 2
This document specifies how the features of the Service Location Protocol, Version 2 allow for vendor extensibility safely, with no possibility of collisions.
The specification introduces a new SLPv2 extension:  The Vendor Opaque Extension.
While proprietary protocol extensions are not encouraged by IETF standards, it is important that they not hinder interoperability of compliant implementations when they are undertaken.
This document udpates RFC 2608, "The Service Location Protocol."
RFC 3223 was never issued.
This document describes the terms to be used in a methodology that determines the IP packet forwarding performance of IP routers as a function of the forwarding information base installed within a router.
The forwarding performance of an IP router may be dependent upon or may be linked to the composition and size of the forwarding information base installed within a router.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document examines the various longer term trends visible within the characteristics of the Internet's BGP table and identifies a number of operational practices and protocol factors that contribute to these trends.
The potential impacts of these practices and protocol properties on the scaling properties of the inter domain routing space are examined.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document specifies protocol enhancements that allow transparent routing of IP datagrams to mobile nodes in the Internet.
Each mobile node is always identified by its home address, regardless of its current point of attachment to the Internet.
While situated away from its home, a mobile node is also associated with a care of address, which provides information about its current point of attachment to the Internet.
The protocol provides for registering the care of address with a home agent.
The home agent sends datagrams destined for the mobile node through a tunnel to the care of address.
After arriving at the end of the tunnel, each datagram is then delivered to the mobile node.
This document presents the Telephony Routing over IP (TRIP).
TRIP is a policy driven inter administrative domain protocol for advertising the reachability of telephony destinations between location servers, and for advertising attributes of the routes to those destinations.
TRIP's operation is independent of any signaling protocol, hence TRIP can serve as the telephony routing protocol for any signaling protocol.
Preventing the Million Message Attack on Cryptographic Message Syntax
This memo describes a strategy for resisting the Million Message Attack.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document specifies the algorithm for wrapping one Triple DES key with another Triple DES key and the algorithm for wrapping one RC2 key with another RC2 key.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes the objectives for a new data definition language, suitable for the modeling of network management constructs, that can be directly mapped into SNMP and COPS PR protocol operations.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document provides state machine tables for ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode) switch LSRs.
In the current LDP specification, there is no state machine specified for processing LDP messages.
We think that defining a common state machine is very important for interoperability between different LDP and CR LDP implementations.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document presents an approach to modify the bandwidth and possibly other parameters of an established CR LSP (Constraint based Routed Label Switched Paths) using CR LDP (Constraint based Routed Label Distribution Protocol) without service interruption.
This document discusses the applicability of Constraint Based LSP Setup using LDP.
It discusses possible network applications, extensions to Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) required to implement constraint based routing, guidelines for deployment and known limitations of the protocol.
This document is a prerequisite to advancing CR LDP on the standards track.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Constraint Based LSP Setup using LDP
This document specifies mechanisms and TLVs (Type/Length/Value) for support of CR LSPs
(constraint based routed Label Switched Path) using LDP (Label Distribution Protocol).
This document provides a method of encrypting data using user supplied passwords and, by extension, any form of variable length keying material which is not necessarily an algorithm specific fixed format key.
The Cryptographic Message Syntax data format does not currently contain any provisions for password based data encryption.
This memo discusses the applicability of "Extensions to RSVP (Resource ReSerVation Protocol) for LSP Tunnels".
It highlights the protocol's principles of operation and describes the network context for which it was designed.
Guidelines for deployment are offered and known protocol limitations are indicated.
This document is intended to accompany the submission of "Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels" onto the Internet standards track.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
RSVP TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels
This document describes the use of RSVP (Resource Reservation Protocol), including all the necessary extensions, to establish label switched paths (LSPs) in MPLS (Multi Protocol Label Switching).
Since the flow along an LSP is completely identified by the label applied at the ingress node of the path, these paths may be treated as tunnels.
A key application of LSP tunnels is traffic engineering with MPLS as specified in RFC 2702.
PGM guarantees that a receiver in the group either receives all data packets from transmissions and repairs, or is able to detect unrecoverable data packet loss.
PGM is specifically intended as a workable solution for multicast applications with basic reliability requirements.
Its central design goal is simplicity of operation with due regard for scalability and network efficiency.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document describes an extension to the SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) service that allows an SMTP server and client to use TLS
(Transport Layer Security) to provide private, authenticated communication over the Internet.
This gives SMTP agents the ability to protect some or all of their communications from eavesdroppers and attackers.
The SYS and AUTH POP Response Codes
This memo proposes two response codes: SYS and AUTH, which enable clients to unambiguously determine an optimal response to an authentication failure.
In addition, a new capability (AUTH RESP CODE) is defined.
On the use of HTTP as a Substrate Recently there has been widespread interest in using Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) as a substrate for other applications level protocols.
This document recommends technical particulars of such use, including use of default ports, URL schemes, and HTTP security mechanisms.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
This document describes MIME types for application/ISUP and application/QSIG objects for use in SIP applications, according to the rules defined in RFC 2048.
These types can be used to identify ISUP and QSIG objects within a SIP message such as INVITE or INFO, as might be implemented when using SIP in an environment where part of the call involves interworking to the PSTN.
This memo defines an extension of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in TCP/IP based internets.
In particular, it defines objects for managing the Frame Relay Service Level Definitions.
This memo defines an extension of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in TCP/IP based internets.
In particular, it defines objects for managing the insertion of interesting Circuit Interfaces into the ifTable.
This is important for circuits that must be used within other MIB modules which require an ifEntry.
It allows for integrated monitoring of circuits as well as routing to circuits using unaltered, pre existing MIB modules.
RFC 3200 was never issued.
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
Author's Address Sandy Ginoza University of Southern California Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
Full Copyright Statement Copyright (C)
This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works.
However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than English.
The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS
ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
Acknowledgement Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the Internet Society.
