Abstract This document gives requirements for the Internet Open Trading Protocol (IOTP)
Version 2 by describing design principles and scope and dividing features into those which will, may, or will not be included.
Version 2 of the IOTP will extend the interoperable framework for Internet commerce capabilities of Version 1 while replacing the XML messaging and digital signature part of IOTP v1 with standards based mechanisms.
Introduction Version 2 of the Internet Open Trading Protocol (IOTP) will extend the interoperable framework for Internet commerce capabilities of Version 1 [RFC 2801] as described in Section 3 below.
In addition, it will replace the ad hoc XML messaging and digital signature [RFC 2802] parts of IOTP v1 with standards based mechanisms [RFC 3275].
This document gives requirements for the Internet Open Trading Protocol (IOTP)
Version 2 by describing design principles and scope and dividing features into those which will, may, or will not be included.
Design Principles and Scope 1.
The specification must describe the syntax and processing necessary for an extension of the interoperable framework for Internet commerce described in IOTP V1.0
Keep changes to IOTP V1.0 to a minimum. 3.
Maintain all existing functionality of IOTP V1.0.
Test all XML DTDs and/or Schemas and XML examples in the specification to insure that they are well formed.
Create usage/implementation guidance information, probably as a separate document.
It should be designed to work well with other protocols such as ECML [RFC 3106].
IOTP Version 2 should be developed as part of the broader Web design philosophy of decentralization, URIs, Web data, and modularity /layering / extensibility.
In this context, this standard should take advantage of existing provider (and infrastructure) primitives.
Requirements IOTP Version 2 will include the following: 1.
Be a superset of IOTP Version 1.
Provide for the Dynamic Definition of Trading Sequences.
I.E., transactions will not be limited, as with v1, to a single payment and a single delivery with delivery occurring after payment.
Instead, it will be possible to propose an arbitrary sequence of transaction steps.
Include specification of an Offer Request Block.
Support Improved Problem Resolution (extend to cover presentation of signed receipt to customer support party, better defined Customer Care role, etc.).
Add provisions to indicate and handle a payment protocol not tunneled through IOTP.
Add support for server based wallets.
The following may be include in IOTP v2:
For example, a means to specify that a customer approval covers not only the instant purchase but also some limited number of future purchase with some total or per purchase spending limit.
Enhanced Server to Server messages.
For example, a means for a Delivery Handler to inform a Payment Handler that goods have actually shipped, which may be a pre condition for making a charge against a credit card.
Include the ability to add both fields and attributes to existing trading blocks in addition to the present ability to add entirely new trading blocks.
The following are out of scope for IOTP version 2: 1.
Legal or regulatory issues surrounding the implementation of the protocol or information systems using it.
Design of an XML Messaging Layer.
Instead, whatever is or appears most likely to become the standard XML messaging layer will be used.
This includes a standard enveloping, addressing, and error reporting framework.
Design of XML Digital Signatures.
Instead, the existing standard [RFC 3275] will be used.
Security Considerations As provided above, IOTP v2 will provide optional authentication via standards based XML Digital Signatures [RFC 3275]; however, neither IOTP v1 nor v2 provide a confidentiality mechanism.
Both require the use of secure channels such as those provided by TLS [RFC 2246] or IPSEC for confidentiality and depend on the security mechanisms of any payment system used in conjunction with them to secure payments.
