Message/External Body Content ID Access Type Status of this Memo
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This memo does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
Discussion and suggestions for improvement are requested.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
Abstract When using MIME [MIME] to encapsulate a structured object that consist of many elements, for example an SGML [SGML] document, a single element may occur several times.
An encapsulation normally maps each of the structured objects elements to a MIME entity.
It is useful to include elements that occur multiple time exactly once.
To accomplish that and to preserve the object structure it is desirable to unambiguously refer to another body part of the same message.
The existing MIME Content Type Message/External Body access types allow a MIME entity (body part) to refer to an object that is not in the message by specifying how to access that object.
The Content ID access method described in this document provides the capability to refer to an object within the message.
Introduction Consider a MIME multipart entity several of whose body parts contain the same data (body) but different parameters or Content   headers.
Representing those body parts without duplicating the data in each one promotes efficient use of resources (bandwidth and storage space).
To achieve these benefits an access type is defined that permits one message part to refer to another one in the same message.
The Content ID Access Type 2.1 Registration Information MIME access type name:
this document Person & email address to contact for further information:
The content id header of the access type content id MIME entity must match (be identical to) exactly one content id in the same message, excluding other access type content id entities.
Thus, the content id access type can only occur within a multipart message and can refer to another body part anywhere in the same message.
A MIME User Agent (MUA) constructs the resultant MIME body part as described below.
We call the access type content id MIME entity the referring body part and the MIME body part to which it refers, the one with the matching content id, the referenced body part.
The MIME entity that results from content
id access type consists of: (a) the referenced body part's content type header, (b) the referring body part's headers except its content type header, (c)
any headers in the referenced body part not in the referring one, (d)  the line separating the headers from the body, and (e)  the referenced body part's body.
The following example shows a message that consists of two identical images.
MIME Version: 1.0 Content Type: Multipart/Mixed; boundary tiger lily  tiger lily Content Type:
Message/External Body; access type content
> Content Description: This body part is duplicated by reference  tiger lily
The equivalent MIME entity for the second body part is:  tiger lily Content Type: image/jpeg Content ID: <950323.1552@XIson.com
> Content Description: This body part is duplicated by reference
The content id access type does not impact the security of messages or systems.
The referenced MIME entity may have security implications.
Text and office systems   Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML).
Part One: Mechanisms for Specifying and Describing the Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC 1521, Bellcore, Innosoft, September 1993.
Authors' Addresses Edward Levinson Accurate Information Systems, Inc. 2
2265 USA Phone:  1 908 389 5550 EMail:
James Clark 90 Clarendon Road London W11 2HR UK EMail:
