1.  Abstract The Point to Point Protocol (PPP) [1] provides a standard method for transporting multi protocol datagrams over point to point links.
PPP also defines an extensible Link Control Protocol (LCP), which allows negotiation of an Authentication Protocol for authenticating its peer before allowing Network Layer protocols to transmit over the link.
Both LCP and Authentication Protocol packets may contain text which is intended to be human readable [2,3,4].
This document defines an LCP configuration option for the negotiation of character set and language usage, as required by RFC 2277 [5].
In this document, the key words "MAY", "MUST, "MUST NOT", "optional", "recommended", "SHOULD", and "SHOULD NOT" are to be interpreted as described in [6].
The Configuration Option format and basic options are already defined for LCP [1].
Up to date values of the LCP Option Type field are specified in STD 2 [7].
This document concerns the following value: 28  Internationalization
The Internationalization option described here MAY be negotiated independently in each direction.
Only one instance of this option SHOULD be sent by an implementation, representing its preferred language and charset.
If Internationalization option is rejected by the peer, the default language and charset MUST be used to construct all human readable messages sent to the peer.
This Configuration Option provides a method for an implementation to indicate to the peer both the language in which human readable messages it sends should be composed and the charset in which that language should be represented.
A summary of the Internationalization option format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
The MIBenum field is four octets in length.
It contains a unique integer value identifying a charset [5,11].
This value MUST represent one of the set of charsets listed in the IANA charset registry [7].
The charset registration procedure is described in RFC 2278 [9].
The default charset value is UTF 8 [10].
The MIBenum value for the UTF 8 charset is 106.
Language Tag The Language Tag field is an ASCII string which contains a language tag, as defined in RFC 1766 [8].
Language tags are in principle case insensitive; however, since the capitalization of a tag does not carry any meaning, implementations SHOULD send only lower case Tag fields.
The default Tag value is "i default" [8].
It is possible that an attacker might manipulate the option in such a way that displayable messages would be unintelligible to the reader.
Chair's Address Karl Fox Ascend Communications 3518 Riverside Drive Suite 101 Columbus
, OH 43221 Phone:  1 614 326 6841 EMail:
