Abstract This memo defines an extension to the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in TCP/IP based internets.
In particular, it defines objects for managing DS3 and E3 Interfaces.
This document is a companion document with Definitions of Managed Objects for the DS1 Interface Type.
This document entirely replaces RFC 1233, which contains a fundamental error: many objects are encoded as Counters that must be encoded as INTEGERs or Gauges.
The magnitude of the change required is sufficient that virtually every object changed.
Therefore, the MIB documented in RFC 1233 should not be implemented.
The Internet standard Network Management Framework consists of three components.
They are: STD 16/RFC 1155 which defines the SMI, the mechanisms used for describing and naming objects for the purpose of management.
STD 16/RFC 1212 defines a more concise description mechanism, which is wholly consistent with the SMI.
RFC 1156 which defines MIB I, the core set of managed objects for the Internet suite of protocols.
STD 17/RFC 1213, defines MIB II, an evolution of MIB I based on implementation experience and new operational requirements.
STD 15/RFC 1157 which defines the SNMP, the protocol used for network access to managed objects.
The Framework permits new objects to be defined for the purpose of experimentation and evaluation.
Objects Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed the Management Information Base or MIB.
Objects in the MIB are defined using the subset of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1)
[7] defined in the SMI.
In particular, each object has a name, a syntax, and an encoding.
The name is an object identifier, an administratively assigned name, which specifies an object type.
The object type together with an object instance serves to uniquely identify a specific instantiation of the object.
For human convenience, we often use a textual string, termed the OBJECT DESCRIPTOR, to also refer to the object type.
The syntax of an object type defines the abstract data structure corresponding to that object type.
The ASN.1 language is used for this purpose.
However, the SMI [3] purposely restricts the ASN.1 constructs which may be used.
These restrictions are explicitly made for simplicity.
The encoding of an object type is simply how that object type is represented using the object type's syntax.
Implicitly tied to the notion of an object type's syntax and encoding
is how the object type is represented when being transmitted on the network.
The SMI specifies the use of the basic encoding rules of ASN.1 [8], subject to the additional requirements imposed by the SNMP.
Format of Definitions Section 4 contains contains the specification of all object types contained in this MIB module.
The object types are defined using the conventions defined in the SMI, as amended by the extensions specified in STD 16, RFC 1212 [13].
This MIB obsoletes RFC 1233.
The changes from RFC 1233 are the following:
This MIB module contains information to manage an E3 interface, also.
This MIB module contains three groups: DS3/E3 Near End Group which is mandatory, DS3 Far End Group which is optional, and DS3 Fractional Group which is optional.
The DS3 Far End Group is a new group and contains configuration information and statistics that are collected from the far end DS3/E3 interface.
Presently, the Far End Group may only be implemented by DS3 systems that use C bit Parity or SYNTRAN.
The DS3 Fractional Group is a new group and is modeled after the DS1 Fractional Group.
ds3CSUIndex has been redefined and renamed to dsx3LineIndex.
This object is the identifier of a DS3/E3 Interface on a device.
On a CSU, a single DS3/E3 data stream will cross two DS3/E3 interfaces, which have separate dsx3LineIndex values.
ds3Index has been redefined and renamed to dsx3IfIndex.
This value for this object is equal to the value of ifIndex from the Interfaces table of MIB II (STD 17, RFC 1213).
The ACCESS for objects in the dsx3ConfigTable has been set to read write for items that are configurable.
The dsx3ZeroCoding has been renamed to dsx3LineCoding.
A new object has been added called dsx3LoopbackConfig, which better describes the loopback capabilities of a DS3/E3 interface on a device.
The dsx3SendCode object has been updated to reflect different types of loopback messages.
A new object has been added called dsx3LineStatus.
This object better describes the status (e.g., failure state and loopback state) of a DS3/E3 interface.
A new object has been added called dsx3TransmitClockSource.
This object identifies the source for the transmit clock.
All Counters have been changed to Gauges.
A Line Errored Seconds object has been added to all near end tables.
Line Coding Violations are counted instead of Bipolar Violations.
A new Coding Violation counter has been added to count coding violations reported via the C bits of SYNTRAN and C bit Parity DS3 applications.
The original Coding Violation counter has been renamed to PCV to mean coding violations reported via the P bits.
This count is also added for symmetry with the far end statistics.
A new Errored Second counter and Severely Errored Second counter has been added to count these performance events via the C bits of the SYNTRAN and C bit Parity DS3 applications.
The original ES and SES counters have been renamed to PES and PSES to mean reported via the P bits.
These counts are also added for symmetry with the far end statistics.
These objects are used when the particular media being used to realize an interface is a DS3/E3 interface.
At present, this applies to these values of the ifType variable in the Internet standard MIB: ds3 (30)
The DS3 definitions contained herein are based on the DS3 specifications in ANSI T1.102 1987, ANSI T1.107 1988, ANSI T1.107a  1990, and ANSI T1.404 1989 [9,10,10a,11].
The E3 definitions contained herein are based on the E3 specifications in CCITT G.751 [14].
Binding between ifIndex and DS3/E3 Interfaces Different physical configurations for the support of SNMP with DS3/E3 equipment exist.
To accommodate these scenarios, two different indices for DS3/E3 interfaces are introduced in this MIB.
These indices are dsx3IfIndex and dsx3LineIndex.
External interface scenario: the SNMP Agent represents all managed DS3/E3 lines as external interfaces (for example, an Agent residing on the device supporting DS3/E3 interfaces directly): For this scenario, all interfaces are assigned an integer value equal to ifIndex, and the following applies:
ifIndex dsx3IfIndex dsx3LineIndex for all interfaces.
The dsx3IfIndex column of the DS3/E3 Configuration table relates each DS3/E3 interface to its corresponding interface (ifIndex) in the Internet standard MIB
(MIB II STD 17, RFC 1213).
interface scenario: the SNMP Agents resides on an host external from the device supporting DS3/E3 interfaces (e.g., a router).
The Agent represents both the host and the DS3/E3 device.
The index dsx3LineIndex is used to not only represent the DS3/E3 interfaces external from the host/DS3/E3 device combination, but also the DS3/E3 interfaces connecting the host and the DS3/E3 device.
The index dsx3IfIndex is always equal to ifIndex.
A shelf full of CSUs connected to a Router.
An SNMP Agent residing on the router proxies for itself and the CSU.
For this example, ifNumber is equal to 5.
Note the following description of dsx3LineIndex:
the dsx3LineIndex identifies a DS3/E3 Interface on a managed device.
If there is an ifEntry that is directly associated with this and only this DS3/E3 interface, it should have the same value as ifIndex.
Otherwise, number the dsx3LineIndices with an unique identifier following the rules of choosing a number greater than ifNumber and numbering inside interfaces (e.g., equipment side) with even numbers and outside interfaces (e.g., network side) with odd numbers.
Objectives of this MIB Module
There are numerous things that could be included in a MIB for DS3/E3 signals: the management of multiplexors, CSUs, DSUs, and the like.
The intent of this document is to facilitate the common management of all devices with DS3/E3 interfaces.
As such, a design decision was made up front to very closely align the MIB with the set of objects that can generally be read from DS3/E3 devices that are currently deployed.
The terminology used in this document to describe error conditions on a DS3 interface as monitored by a DS3 device are based on the definitions from the ANSI T1M1.3/92 005R1 draft standard [12].
If the definition in this document does not match the definition in the ANSI T1M1.3/92 005R1 draft document, the implementer should follow the definition described in this document.
Error Events Bipolar Violation (BPV) Error Event
A bipolar violation error event, for B3ZS(HDB3) coded signals, is the occurrence of a pulse of the same polarity as the previous pulse without being part of the zero substitution code, B3ZS(HDB3).
For B3ZS(HDB3) coded signals, a bipolar violation error event may also include other error patterns such as:  three(four) or more consecutive zeros and incorrect polarity.
Excessive Zeros (EXZ) Error Event
An EXZ is the occurrence of any zero string length equal to or greater than 3 for B3ZS, or greater than 4 for HDB3.
Line Coding Violation (LCV) Error Event
This parameter is a count of both BPVs and EXZs occurring over the accumulation period.
An EXZ increments the LCV by one regardless of the length of the zero string.
P bit Coding Violation (PCV) Error Event For all DS3 applications, a coding violation error event is a P bit Parity Error event.
A P bit Parity Error event is the occurrence of a received P bit code on the DS3 M frame that is not identical to the corresponding locally  calculated code.
C bit Coding Violation (CCV)
For C bit Parity and SYNTRAN DS3 applications, this is the count of coding violations reported via the C bits.
For C bit Parity, it is a count of CP bit parity errors occurring in the accumulation interval.
For SYNTRAN, it is a count of CRC 9 errors occurring in the accumulation interval.
Performance Parameters All performance parameters are accumulated in fifteen minute intervals and up to 96 intervals (24 hours worth) are kept by an agent.
Fewer than 96 intervals of data will be available if the agent has been restarted within the last 24 hours.
In addition, there is a rolling 24 hour total of each performance parameter.
There is no requirement for an agent to ensure fixed relationship between the start of a fifteen minute interval and any wall clock; however some agents may align the fifteen minute intervals with quarter hours.
Errored Second is a second in which one or more CVs occurred OR one or more LOS defects.
P bit Errored Seconds (PES)
An PES is a second with one or more PCVs OR one or more Out of Frame defects OR a detected incoming AIS.
This gauge is not incremented when UASs are counted.
A PSES is a second with 44 or more PCVs OR one or more Out of Frame defects OR a detected incoming AIS.
This gauge is not incremented when UASs are counted.
C bit Errored Seconds (CES)
An CES is a second with one or more CCVs OR one or more Out of Frame defects OR a detected incoming AIS.
This count is only for the SYNTRAN and C bit Parity DS3 applications.
This gauge is not incremented when UASs are counted.
A CSES is a second with 44 or more CCVs OR one or more Out of Frame defects OR a detected incoming AIS.
This count is only for the SYNTRAN and C bit Parity DS3 applications.
This gauge is not incremented when UASs are counted.
Severely Errored Framing Seconds (SEFS)
A SEFS is a second with one or more Out of Frame defects OR a detected incoming AIS.
Unavailable Seconds (UAS) UAS are calculated by counting the number of seconds that the interface is unavailable.
The DS3 interface is said to be unavailable from the onset of 10 contiguous PSESs, or the onset of the condition leading to a failure (see Failure States).
If the condition leading to the failure was immediately preceded by one or more contiguous PSESs, then the DS3 interface unavailability starts from the onset of these PSESs.
Once unavailable, and if no failure is present, the DS3 interface becomes available at the onset of 10 contiguous seconds with no PSESs.
Once unavailable, and if a failure is present, the DS3 interface becomes available at the onset of 10 contiguous seconds with no PSESs, if the failure clearing time is less than or equal to 10 seconds.
If the failure clearing time is more than 10 seconds, the DS3 interface becomes available at the onset of 10 contiguous seconds with no PSESs, or the onset period leading to the successful clearing condition, whichever occurs later.
With respect to the DS3 error counts, all counters are incremented while the DS3 interface is deemed available.
While the interface is deemed unavailable, the only count that is incremented is UASs.
A special case exists when the 10 or more second period crosses the 900 second statistics window boundary, as the foregoing description implies that the PSES and UAS counters must be adjusted when the Unavailable Signal State is entered.
Clearly, successive GETs of the affected dsx3IntervalPSESs and dsx3IntervalUASs objects will return differing values if the first GET occurs during the first few seconds of the window.
This is viewed as an unavoidable side effect of selecting the presently defined managed objects as a basis for this memo.
Performance Defects Failure States: The Remote Alarm Indication (RAI) failure, in SYNTRAN applications, is declared after detecting the Yellow Alarm Signal on the alarm channel.
The Remote Alarm Indication failure, in C bit Parity DS3 applications, is declared as soon as the preqsence of either one or two alarm signals are detected on then Far End Alarm Channel.
The Remote Alarm Indication failure may also be declared after detecting the far end SEF/AIS defect (aka yellow).
The Remote Alarm Indication failure is cleared as soon as the presence of the any of the above alarms are removed.
Also, the incoming failure state is declared when a defect persists for at least 2 10 seconds.
The defects are the following:  Loss of Signal (LOS), an Out of Frame (OOF) or an incoming Alarm Indication Signal (AIS).
The Failure State is cleared when the defect is absent for less than or equal to 20 seconds.
A Far End SEF/AIS defect is the occurrence of the two X bits in a M frame set to zero.
The Far End SEF/AIS defect is terminated when the two X bits in a M frame are set to one.
Out of Frame (OOF) defect A DS3 OOF defect is detected when any three or more errors in sixteen or fewer consecutive F bits occur within a DS3 M frame.
An OOF defect may also be called a Severely Errored Frame (SEF) defect.
An OOF defect is cleared when reframe occurs.
A DS3 Loss of Frame (LOF) failure is declared when the DS3 OOF defect is consistent for 2 to 10 seconds.
The DS3 OOF defect ends when reframe occurs.
The DS3 LOF failure is cleared when the DS3 OOF defect is absent for 10 to 20 seconds.
An E3 OOF defect is detected when four consecutive frame alignment signals have been incorrectly received in there predicted positions in an E3 signal.
E3 frame alignment occurs when the presence of three consecutive frame alignment signals have been detected.
Loss of Signal (LOS) defect
Alarm Indication Signal (AIS) defect
The DS3 AIS is framed with "stuck stuffing."
This implies that it has a valid M subframe alignments bits, M frame alignment bits, and P bits.
The information bits are set to a 1010...
sequence, starting with a one (1) after each M subframe alignment bit, M frame alignment bit, X bit, P bit, and C bit.
The C bits are all set to zero giving what is called "stuck stuffing."
The X bits are set to one.
The DS3 AIS defect is declared after DS3 AIS is present in contiguous M frames for a time equal to or greater than T, where 0.2 ms <  T <
The DS3 AIS defect is terminated after AIS is absent in contiguous M frames for a time equal to or greater than T. The E3 binary content of the AIS is nominally a continuous stream of ones.
AIS detection and the application of consequent actions, should be completed within a time limit of 1 ms. 3.3.4.
This is a character string specified by the circuit vendor, and is useful when communicating with the vendor during the troubleshooting process.
Object Definitions RFC1407 MIB DEFINITIONS ::
BEGIN IMPORTS Gauge FROM RFC1155
SMI DisplayString, transmission FROM RFC1213
MIB OBJECT TYPE FROM RFC 1212;
This MIB module uses the extended OBJECT TYPE macro   as defined in RFC 1212.
The DS3/E3 Near End Group   Implementation of this group is mandatory for all   systems that attach to a DS3/E3 Interface.
the DS3/E3 Configuration dsx3ConfigTable OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
{ ds3 5 } dsx3ConfigEntry OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
"An entry in the DS3/E3 Configuration table.
dsx3CircuitIdentifier DisplayString, dsx3LoopbackConfig INTEGER, dsx3LineStatus INTEGER, dsx3TransmitClockSource
INTEGER } dsx3LineIndex OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"This object is the identifier of a DS3/E3 Interface on a managed device.
If there is an ifEntry that is directly associated with this and only this DS3/E3 interface, it should have the same value as ifIndex.
Otherwise, number the dsx3LineIndices with an unique identifier following the rules of choosing a number that is greater than ifNumber and numbering the inside interfaces (e.g., equipment side) with even numbers and outside interfaces (e.g, network side) with odd numbers."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"This value for this object is equal to the value of ifIndex from the Interfaces table of MIB II (RFC 1213)."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of seconds that have elapsed since the beginning of the near end current error  measurement period."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of previous near end intervals for which valid data was collected.
The value will be 96 unless the interface was brought online within the last 24 hours, in which case the value will be the number of complete 15 minute near end intervals since the interface has been online."
"This variable indicates the variety of DS3 C bit or E3 application implementing this interface.
The type of interface affects the interpretation of the usage and error statistics.
The rate of DS3 is 44.736 Mbps and E3 is 34.368 Mbps.
The dsx3ClearChannel value means that the C bits are not used except for sending/receiving AIS.
The values, in sequence, describe:
"This variable describes the variety of Zero Code Suppression used on this interface, which in turn affects a number of its characteristics.
dsx3B3ZS and e3HDB3 refer to the use of specified patterns of normal bits and bipolar violations which are used to replace sequences of zero bits of a specified length."
INTEGER { dsx3SendNoCode(1), dsx3SendLineCode(2), dsx3SendPayloadCode(3), dsx3SendResetCode(4), dsx3SendDS1LoopCode(5), dsx3SendTestPattern(6) }
"This variable indicates what type of code is being sent across the DS3/E3 interface by the device.
(These are optional for E3 interfaces.)
dsx3SendNoCode sending looped or normal data
dsx3SendLineCode sending a request for a line loopback
dsx3SendPayloadCode sending a request for a payload loopback (i.e., all DS1/E1s in a DS3/E3 frame)
dsx3SendResetCode sending a loopback deactivation request dsx3SendDS1LoopCode requesting to loopback a particular DS1/E1 within a DS3/E3 frame dsx3SendTestPattern sending a test pattern."
"This variable contains the transmission vendor's circuit identifier, for the purpose of facilitating troubleshooting."
INTEGER { dsx3NoLoop(1), dsx3PayloadLoop(2), dsx3LineLoop(3), dsx3OtherLoop(4) } ACCESS  read write
"This variable represents the loopback configuration of the DS3/E3 interface.
Not in the loopback state.
A device that is not capable of performing a loopback on the interface shall always return this as it's value.
The received signal at this interface is looped through the device.
Typically the received signal is looped back for retransmission after it has passed through the device's framing function.
The received signal at this interface does not go through the device (minimum penetration) but is looped back out.
dsx3OtherLoop Loopbacks that are not defined here."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"This variable indicates the Line Status of the interface.
It contains loopback state information and failure state information.
The dsx3LineStatus is a bit map represented as a sum, therefore, it can represent multiple failures and a loopback (see dsx3LoopbackConfig object for the type of loopback) simultaneously.
The dsx3NoAlarm should be set if and only if no other flag is set.
INTEGER { loopTiming(1), localTiming(2), throughTiming(3) }
"The source of Transmit Clock. is derived from the recovered receive clock of another DS3 interface."
The DS3/E3 current table contains various statistics being   collected for the current 15 minute interval.
"An entry in the DS3/E3 Current table."
dsx3CurrentSEFSs Gauge, dsx3CurrentUASs Gauge, dsx3CurrentLCVs Gauge, dsx3CurrentPCVs Gauge, dsx3CurrentLESs Gauge, dsx3CurrentCCVs Gauge, dsx3CurrentCESs Gauge, dsx3CurrentCSESs Gauge }
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies the DS3/E3 interface to which this entry is applicable.
The interface identified by a particular value of this index is the same interface as identified by the same value an dsx3LineIndex object instance."
The counter associated with the number of P bit Errored Seconds, encountered by a DS3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The counter associated with the number of P bit Severely Errored Seconds, encountered by a DS3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
} dsx3CurrentSEFSs OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
The counter associated with the number of Severely Errored Framing Seconds, encountered by a DS3/E3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The counter associated with the number of Unavailable Seconds, encountered by a DS3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The counter associated with the number of Line Coding Violations encountered by a DS3/E3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The counter associated with the number of P bit Coding Violations, encountered by a DS3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of C bit Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
"The number of C bit
Severely Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The DS3/E3 Interval Table contains various statistics   collected by each DS3/E3 Interface over the previous 24   hours of operation.
The past 24 hours are broken into 96   completed 15 minute intervals.
"An entry in the DS3/E3 Interval table."
dsx3IntervalCSESs Gauge } dsx3IntervalIndex OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies the DS3/E3 interface to which this entry is applicable.
The interface identified by a particular value of this index is the same interface as identified by the same value an dsx3LineIndex object instance."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"A number between 1 and 96, where 1 is the most recently completed 15 minute interval and 96 is the least recently completed 15 minutes interval (assuming that all 96 intervals are valid)."
The counter associated with the number of P bit Errored Seconds, encountered by a DS3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
The counter associated with the number of P bit Severely Errored Seconds, encountered by a DS3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
The counter associated with the number of Severely Errored Framing Seconds, encountered by a DS3/E3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
The counter associated with the number of Unavailable Seconds, encountered by a DS3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
The counter associated with the number of Line Coding Violations encountered by a DS3/E3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The counter associated with the number of P bit Coding Violations, encountered by a DS3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
} dsx3IntervalLESs OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX  Gauge ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Line Errored  Seconds
(BPVs  or illegal  zero  sequences) encountered by a DS3/E3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of C bit Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
"The number of C bit
Severely Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
The DS3/E3 Total Table contains the cumulative sum of the   various statistics for the 24 hour period preceding the   current interval.
"An entry in the DS3/E3 Total table."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies the DS3/E3 interface to which this entry is applicable.
The interface identified by a particular value of this index is the same interface as identified by the same value an dsx3LineIndex object instance."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
The counter associated with the number of P bit Severely Errored Seconds, encountered by a DS3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
The counter associated with the number of Severely Errored Framing Seconds, encountered by a DS3/E3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
The counter associated with the number of Unavailable Seconds, encountered by a DS3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
The counter associated with the number of Line Coding Violations encountered by a DS3/E3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
The counter associated with the number of P bit Coding Violations, encountered by a DS3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Line Errored  Seconds
(BPVs  or illegal  zero  sequences) encountered by a DS3/E3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of C bit Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
"The number of C bit
Severely Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
The DS3 Far End Group   Implementation of this group is optional for all systems   that attach to a DS3 Interface.
However, only C bit Parity and SYNTRAN DS3 applications   have the capability (option) of providing this information.
The DS3 Far End Configuration Table contains   configuration information   reported in the C bits from the remote end.
"The DS3 Far End Configuration table."
"An entry in the DS3 Far End Configuration table."
dsx3FarEndFacilityIDCode DisplayString } dsx3FarEndLineIndex OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies the DS3 interface to which this entry is applicable.
The interface identified by a particular value of this index is the same interface as identified by the same value an dsx3LineIndex object instance."
"This is the Far End Equipment Identification code that describes the specific piece of equipment.
It is sent within the Path Identification Message."
"This is the Far End Location Identification code that describes the specific location of the equipment.
It is sent within the Path Identification Message."
"This is the Far End Frame Identification code that identifies where the equipment is located within a building at a given location.
It is sent within the Path Identification Message."
"This is the Far End code that identifies the equipment location within a bay.
It is sent within the Path Identification Message."
"This code identifies a specific Far End DS3 path.
It is sent within the Path Identification Message."
The DS3 Far End Current
The DS3 Far End Current table contains various statistics   being collected for the current 15 minute interval.
The statistics are collected from the far end block error   code within the C bits.
"The DS3 Far End Current table."
"An entry in the DS3 Far End Current table."
INTEGER, dsx3FarEndTimeElapsed INTEGER, dsx3FarEndValidIntervals INTEGER, dsx3FarEndCurrentCESs Gauge, dsx3FarEndCurrentCSESs Gauge, dsx3FarEndCurrentCCVs Gauge, dsx3FarEndCurrentUASs Gauge } dsx3FarEndCurrentIndex
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies the DS3 interface to which this entry is applicable.
The interface identified by a particular value of this index is the same interface as identified by the same value an dsx3LineIndex object instance."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of previous far end intervals for which valid data was collected.
The value will be 96 unless the interface was brought online within the last 24 hours, in which case the value will be the number of complete 15 minute far end intervals since the interface has been online."
The counter associated with the number of Far Far End C bit Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The counter associated with the number of Far End C bit
Severely Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The counter associated with the number of Far End C bit Coding Violations reported via the far end block error count encountered by a DS3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
The counter associated with the number of Far End unavailable seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The DS3 Far End Interval
The DS3 Far End Interval Table contains various statistics   collected by each DS3 interface over the previous 24   hours of operation.
The past 24 hours are broken into 96   completed 15 minute intervals.
"The DS3 Far End Interval table."
"An entry in the DS3 Far End Interval table."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies the DS3 interface to which this entry is applicable.
The interface identified by a particular value of this index is the same interface as identified by the same value an dsx3LineIndex object instance."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"A number between 1 and 96, where 1 is the most recently completed 15 minute interval and 96 is the least recently completed 15 minutes interval (assuming that all 96 intervals are valid)."
The counter associated with the number of Far End C bit Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
The counter associated with the number of Far End C bit
Severely Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
4 } dsx3FarEndIntervalCCVs OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The counter associated with the number of Far End C bit Coding Violations reported via the far end block error count encountered by a DS3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The counter associated with the number of Far End unavailable seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
The DS3 Far End Total
The DS3 Far End Total Table contains the cumulative sum   of the various statistics for the 24 hour period preceding   the current interval.
"The DS3 Far End Total table.
"An entry in the DS3 Far End Total table."
SEQUENCE { dsx3FarEndTotalIndex INTEGER, dsx3FarEndTotalCESs Gauge, dsx3FarEndTotalCSESs Gauge, dsx3FarEndTotalCCVs Gauge, dsx3FarEndTotalUASs Gauge } dsx3FarEndTotalIndex
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies the DS3 interface to which this entry is applicable.
The interface identified by a particular value of this index is the same interface as identified by the same value an dsx3LineIndex object instance."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
The counter associated with the number of Far End C bit Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The counter associated with the number of Far End C bit
Severely Errored Seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
The counter associated with the number of Far End C bit Coding Violations reported via the far end block error count encountered by a DS3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
The counter associated with the number of Far End unavailable seconds encountered by a DS3 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
It is designed   for those systems dividing a DS3/E3 into channels   containing different data streams that are of local   interest.
The DS3/E3 fractional table identifies which DS3/E3   channels associated with a CSU are being used to   support a logical interface, i.e., an entry in the   interfaces table from the Internet standard MIB.
For example, consider a DS3 device with 4 high speed links   carrying router traffic, a feed for voice, a feed for   video, and a synchronous channel for a non routed   protocol.
We might describe the allocation of channels, in the   dsx3FracTable, as follows:
For dsx3M23, dsx3SYNTRAN, dsx3CbitParity, and   dsx3ClearChannel there are 28 legal channels, numbered 1   through 28.
For e3Framed there are 16 legal channels,   numbered 1 through 16.
The channels (1..16) correspond   directly to the equivalently numbered time slots.
"An entry in the DS3 Fractional table."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies  the DS3  interface  to which this entry is applicable
The interface identified by a  particular value  of  this  index is the same interface as identified by the same value  an  dsx3LineIndex object instance."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The channel number for this entry."
mandatory DESCRIPTION "An index value that uniquely identifies an interface.
The interface identified by a particular value of this index is the same  interface as  identified by the same value an ifIndex object instance.
If no interface is currently using a channel, the value should be zero.
If a single interface occupies more  than  one  time slot,  that ifIndex value will be found in multiple time slots."
This document was produced by the Trunk MIB Working Groups:
Gandalf Ltd John Guerrero   Digital Link Rich Bradford
Clear Communications Corp. Jason Perreault Coral Network Corp. Paul Farah
T3plus George Kajos    Coral Network Corp. 7.
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
