Abstract This document defines a response set for describing assertions a reputation service provider can make about email identifiers, for use in generating reputons.
This document specifies a response set for describing the reputation of an email identifier.
A "response set" in this context is defined in [RFC7070] and is used to describe assertions a reputation service provider can make about email identifiers as well as metadata that can be included in such a reply beyond the base set specified there.
An atomic reputation response is called a "reputon", defined in [RFC7071].
That document also defines a media type to contain a reputon for transport, and creates a registry for reputation applications and the interesting parameters of each.
This section defines terms used in the rest of the document.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [KEYWORDS].
Email Definitions Commonly used definitions describing entities in the email architecture are defined and discussed in [EMAIL ARCH].
Other terms of importance in this document are defined in [RFC7070], the base document for the reputation services work.
The expression of reputation about an email identifier requires extensions of the base set defined in [RFC7070].
This document defines and registers some common assertions about an entity found in a piece of [MAIL].
The "email id" reputation application recognizes the following assertions:
The subject identifier is associated with sending or handling email of a personally abusive, threatening, or otherwise harassing nature fraud:
The subject identifier is associated with the sending or handling of fraudulent email, such as "phishing" (some good discussion on this topic can be found in [IODEF PHISHING])
The subject identifier is associated with delivery attempts to nonexistent recipients malware:
The subject identifier is associated with the sending or handling of malware via email spam:
The subject identifier is associated with the sending or handling of unwanted bulk email For all assertions, the "rating" scale is linear: a value of 0.0 means there is no data to support the assertion, a value of 1.0 means all accumulated data support the assertion, and the intervening values have a linear relationship (i.e., a score of "x" is twice as strong of an assertion as a value of "x/2").
The "email id" reputation application recognizes the following OPTIONAL extensions to the basic response set defined in [RFC7071]:
A token indicating the source of the identifier; that is, where the subject identifier was found in the message.
This MUST be one of: dkim: The signing domain, i.e., the value of the "d " tag, found on a valid DomainKeys Identified Mail [DKIM] signature in the message ipv4: The IPv4 address of the client
The IPv6 address of the client rfc5321.helo:
The RFC5321.HELO value used by the client (see [SMTP])
rfc5321.mailfrom:  The RFC5321.MailFrom value of the envelope of the message (see [SMTP])
The RFC5322.From field of the message (see [MAIL]) spf:
The domain name portion of the identifier (RFC5321.MailFrom or RFC5321.HELO) verified by [SPF] sources:  A token relating a count of the number of sources of data that contributed to the reported reputation.
This is in contrast to the "sample size" parameter, which indicates the total number of reports across all reporting sources.
A reply that does not contain the "identity" or "sources" extensions is making a non specific statement about how the reputation returned was developed.
A client can use or ignore such a reply at its discretion.
In evaluating an email message on the basis of reputation, there can be more than one identifier in the message needing to be validated.
For example, a message may have different email addresses in the RFC5321.MailFrom parameter and the RFC5322.From header field.
The RFC5321.Helo identifier will obviously be different.
Consequently, the software evaluating the email message may need to query for the reputation of more than one identifier.
The purpose of including the identity in the reply is to expose to the client the context in which the identifier was extracted from the message under evaluation.
In particular, several of the items listed are extracted verbatim from the message and have not been subjected to any kind of validation, while a domain name present in a valid DKIM signature has some more reliable semantics associated with it.
Computing or using reputation information about unauthenticated identifiers has substantially reduced value, but can sometimes be useful when combined.
For example, a reply that indicates a message contained one of these low value identifiers with a high "spam" rating might not be worthy of notice, but a reply that indicates a message contained several of them could be grounds for suspicion.
A client interested in checking these weaker identifiers would issue a query about each of them using the same assertion (e.g., "spam"), and then collate the results to determine which ones and how many of them came back with ratings indicating content of concern, and take action accordingly.
For stronger identifiers, decisions can typically be made based on a few or even just one of them.
A query within this application can include the OPTIONAL query parameter "identity" to indicate which specific identity is of interest to the query.
Legal values are the same as those listed in Section 3.2.
This memo presents one action for IANA, namely the registration of the reputation application "email id".
This section registers the "email id" reputation application, as per the IANA Considerations section of [RFC7071].
The registration parameters are as follows:  Application symbolic name:
: Evaluates DNS domain names or IP addresses found in email identifiers
A string appropriate to the identifier of interest (see Section 3.2 of this document)  Application specific query parameters: identity:  (current) as defined in Section 3.4 of this document  Application specific assertions: abusive:  (current) as defined in Section 3.1 of this document fraud:  (current) as defined in Section 3.1 of this document invalid recipients:  (current) as defined in Section 3.1 of this document malware:  (current) as defined in Section 3.1 of this document spam:
(current) as defined in Section 3.1 of this document  Application specific response set extensions: identity:  (current) as defined in Section 3.2 of this document 5.
Security Considerations This document is primarily an IANA action and doesn't describe any protocols or protocol elements that might introduce new security concerns.
Security considerations relevant to email and email authentication can be found in most of the documents listed in the References sections below.
Information specific to use of reputation services can be found in [CONSIDERATIONS].
Positive vs. Negative Assertions [CONSIDERATIONS]
some current theories about reputation, namely that it will possibly have more impact to develop positive reputations and focus on giving preferential treatment to content or sources that earn those.
However, the assertions defined in this document are all clearly negative in nature.
In effect, this document is recording current use of reputation and of this framework in particular.
It is expected that, in the future, the application being registered here will be augmented, and other applications registered, that focus more on positive assertions rather than negative ones.
