Abstract This document defines a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) repository locator service.
The service makes use of DNS SRV records defined in accordance with RFC 2782.
The service enables certificate using systems to locate PKI repositories.
A number of RFCs (including [RFC2559], [RFC2560], and [RFC2585]) have specified operational protocols for retrieval of PKI data, including public key certificates and revocation information, from PKI repositories.
These RFCs assume that a certificate using system has the information necessary to identify, locate, and connect to the PKI repository with a specific protocol.
Although some tools are available in protocol specific environments for this purpose, such as knowledge references in directory systems, these are restricted for use with a single protocol and do not share a common means of publication.
This document provides a solution to this problem through the use of Service Record (SRV) Resource Records (RRs) in DNS.
This solution is expected to be particularly useful in environments where only a domain name is available.
In other situations (e.g., where a certificate is available that contains the required information), such a DNS lookup is not needed.
[RFC2782] defines a DNS RR for specifying the location of services (SRV).
This document defines SRV records for a PKI repository locator service to enable PKI clients to obtain the necessary information to connect to a domain's PKI repository, including information about each protocol that is supported by that domain for access to its repository.
This document includes the definition of an SRV RR format for this service and an example of its potential use in an email environment.
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document (in uppercase, as shown) are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and server, respectively.
The format of the SRV RR, whose DNS type code is 33, is:  Service.
Name TTL Class SRV Priority Weight Port Target For the PKI repository locator service, this document uses the symbolic name "PKIXREP".
The protocols that can be included in PKIXREP
Assignment of New Protocol Prefixes Protocol prefix assignments for new PKIX repository protocols SHOULD be defined in the document that specifies the protocol.
The existence of multiple repositories MAY be determined by making separate DNS queries for each of the protocols supported by the client.
If this approach is found to be unacceptably inefficient due to a proliferation of repository protocols at a future date, the service discovery protocol could be extended to allow the repository to advertise the protocols supported.
This example uses the fictional domain "example.com" as an aid in understanding the use of SRV records by a certificate using system.
Assume that Alice is an email client that needs a certificate for a recipient.
Alice's client system supports LDAP for certificate retrieval.
Assume the message recipient is Bob and that Bob's email address is bob@example.com.
Assume that example.test maintains a "border directory" PKI repository and that Bob's certificate is available from that directory, "border.example.com", via LDAP.
Alice's client system retrieves, via DNS, the SRV record for  PKIXREP.
The QNAME of the DNS query is  PKIXREP.
The QCLASS of the DNS query is IN.
The QTYPE of the DNS query is SRV.
The result SHOULD include the host address for example.com's border directory system.
Note that if example.com operated its service on a number of hosts, more than one SRV RR would be returned.
In this case, RFC 2782 defines the procedure to be followed in determining which of these should be accessed first.
Security Considerations Security issues regarding PKI repositories themselves are outside the scope of this document.
For LDAP repositories, for example, specific security considerations are addressed in RFC 2559.
Security issues with respect to the use of SRV records in general are addressed in RFC 2782, and these issues apply to the use of SRV records in the context of the PKIXREP service defined here.
This document reserves the use of " PKIXREP" service label.
Since this relates to a service that may pass messages over a number of different message transports, each message must be associated with a specific transport.
In order to ensure that the association between " PKIXREP" and their respective underlying services is deterministic, the IANA has created a new registry: PKIX SRV Protocol Labels.
For this registry, an entry shall consist of a label name and a pointer to a specification describing how the protocol named in the label uses SRV.
Specifications should conform to the requirements listed in [RFC2434] for "specification required".
