Abstract A Segment Routing (SR) architecture leverages source routing and tunneling paradigms and can be directly applied to the use of a Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) data plane.
A node steers a packet through a controlled set of instructions called "segments" by prepending the packet with an SR header.
The segment assignment and forwarding semantic nature of SR raises additional considerations for connectivity verification and fault isolation for a Label Switched Path (LSP) within an SR architecture.
This document illustrates the problem and defines extensions to perform LSP Ping and Traceroute for Segment Routing IGP Prefix and IGP Adjacency Segment Identifiers (SIDs) with an MPLS data plane.
Introduction "Detecting Multiprotocol Label Switched (MPLS)
[RFC8029] defines a simple and efficient mechanism to detect data  plane failures in Label Switched Paths (LSPs) by specifying information to be carried in an MPLS "echo request" and "echo reply" for the purposes of fault detection and isolation.
Mechanisms for reliably sending the echo reply are defined.
The functionality defined in [RFC8029] is modeled after the Ping/Traceroute paradigm (ICMP echo request [RFC792]) and is typically referred to as "LSP Ping" and "LSP Traceroute".
[RFC8029] supports hierarchical and stitching LSPs.
[SR] introduces and describes an SR architecture that leverages the source routing and tunneling paradigms.
A node steers a packet through a controlled set of instructions called "segments" by prepending the packet with an SR header.
A detailed definition of the SR architecture is available in [SR].
As described in [SR] and [SR MPLS], the SR architecture can be directly applied to an MPLS data plane, the SID will be 20 bits, and the SR header is the label stack.
Consequently, the mechanics of data plane validation of [RFC8029] can be directly applied to SR MPLS.
Unlike LDP or RSVP, which are the other well known MPLS control plane protocols, the basis of Segment ID assignment in SR architecture is not always on a hop by hop basis.
Depending on the type of Segment ID, the assignment can be unique to the node or within a domain.
This nature of SR raises additional considerations for validation of fault detection and isolation in an SR network.
This document illustrates the problem and describes a mechanism to perform LSP Ping and Traceroute for Segment Routing IGP Prefix and IGP Adjacency SIDs within an MPLS data plane.
Coexistence of SR Capable and Non SR Capable Node Scenarios [INTEROP] describes how SR operates in a network where SR capable and non SR
In such a network, one or more SR based LSPs and non SR based LSPs are stitched together to achieve an end to end LSP.
This is similar to a network where LDP and RSVP nodes coexist and the mechanism defined in Section 4.5.2 of [RFC8029]
is applicable for LSP Ping and Trace.
Section 8 of this document explains one of the potential gaps that is specific to SR Capable and non SR
capable node scenarios and explains how the existing mechanism defined in [RFC8029] handles it.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
This document uses the terminology defined in [SR] and [RFC8029]; readers are expected to be familiar with those terms.
The following example describes the challenges with using the current MPLS Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) mechanisms on an SR network.
Path Validation in Segment Routing Networks [RFC8029] defines the MPLS OAM mechanisms that help with fault detection and isolation for an MPLS data plane path by the use of various Target Forwarding Equivalence Class (FEC) Stack
sub TLVs that are carried in MPLS echo request packets and used by the responder for FEC validation.
While it is obvious that new sub TLVs need to be assigned for SR, the unique nature of the SR architecture raises the need for additional operational considerations for path validation.
This section discusses the challenges.
/ R4 R5 Figure 1:
Segment Routing Network The Node Segment IDs for R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, R6, R7, and R8 are 5001, 5002, 5003, 5004, 5005, 5006, 5007, and 5008, respectively.
Adjacency Segment ID from R3 to R6 over link L1.
Adjacency Segment ID from R3 to R6 over link L2.
Adjacency segment ID from R2 to R4.
Adjacency Segment ID from R2 to R3.
The forwarding semantic of the Adjacency Segment ID is to pop the Segment ID and send the packet to a specific neighbor over a specific link.
A malfunctioning node may forward packets using the Adjacency Segment ID to an incorrect neighbor or over an incorrect link.
The exposed Segment ID (of an incorrectly forwarded Adjacency Segment ID) might still allow such a packet to reach the intended destination, even though the intended strict traversal was broken.
In the topology above, assume that R1 sends traffic with a segment stack as {9124, 5008} so that the path taken will be R1 R2 R4 R5 R7 R8.
If the Adjacency Segment ID 9124 is misprogrammed in R2 to send the packet to R1 or R3, the packet may still be delivered to R8 (if the nodes are configured with the same SR Global Block (SRGB))
[SR] but not via the expected path.
MPLS traceroute may help with detecting such a deviation in the above mentioned scenario.
However, in a different example, it may not be helpful, for example, if R3 forwards a packet with Adjacency Segment ID 9236 via link L1 (due to misprogramming) when it was expected to be forwarded over link L2.
The format of the following Segment ID sub TLVs follows the philosophy of the Target
FEC Stack TLV carrying FECs corresponding to each label in the label stack.
When operated with the procedures defined in [RFC8029], this allows LSP Ping/Traceroute operations to function when the Target FEC Stack TLV contains more FECs than received label stacks at the responder nodes.
Three new sub TLVs are defined for the Target FEC Stack TLV (Type 1), the Reverse Path Target FEC Stack TLV (Type 16), and the Reply Path TLV (Type 21).
Sub Type    Sub TLV Name
IPv6 IGP Prefix Segment ID
IPv4 IGP Prefix Segment ID
The IPv4 IGP Prefix Segment ID is defined in [SR].
The format is as specified below:
This field carries the IPv4 Prefix to which the Segment ID is assigned.
In case of an Anycast Segment ID, this field will carry the IPv4 Anycast address.
If the prefix is shorter than 32 bits, trailing bits SHOULD be set to zero.
Prefix Length The Prefix Length field is one octet.
It gives the length of the prefix in bits (values can be 1 32).
This field is set to 1, if the responder MUST perform FEC validation using OSPF as the IGP protocol.
Set to 2, if the responder MUST perform Egress FEC validation using the Intermediate System to Intermediate System (IS IS) as the IGP protocol.
Set to 0, if the responder can use any IGP protocol for Egress FEC validation.
The Reserved field MUST be set to 0 when sent and MUST be ignored on receipt.
The IPv6 IGP Prefix Segment ID is defined in [SR].
The format is as specified below:
This field carries the IPv6 prefix to which the Segment ID is assigned.
In case of an Anycast Segment ID, this field will carry the IPv4 Anycast address.
If the prefix is shorter than 128 bits, trailing bits SHOULD be set to zero.
Prefix Length The Prefix Length field is one octet
, it gives the length of the prefix in bits (values can be 1 128).
Protocol Set to 1 if the responder MUST perform FEC validation using OSPF as the IGP protocol.
Set to 2 if the responder MUST perform Egress FEC validation using IS IS as the IGP protocol.
Set to 0 if the responder can use any IGP protocol for Egress FEC validation.
Reserved MUST be set to 0 on send and MUST be ignored on receipt.
This sub TLV is applicable for any IGP Adjacency defined in [SR].
Local Interface ID (4 or 16 octets)
Set to 1 when the Adjacency Segment is a Parallel Adjacency as defined in [SR].
Set to 4 when the Adjacency Segment is IPv4 based and is not a Parallel Adjacency.
Set to 6 when the Adjacency Segment is IPv6 based and is not a Parallel Adjacency.
Set to 0 when the Adjacency Segment is over an unnumbered interface.
Protocol Set to 1 if the responder MUST perform FEC validation using OSPF as the IGP protocol.
Set to 2 if the responder MUST perform Egress FEC validation using IS IS as the IGP protocol.
Set to 0 if the responder can use any IGP protocol for Egress FEC validation.
Reserved MUST be set to 0 on send and MUST be ignored on receipt.
An identifier that is assigned by the local Label Switching Router (LSR) for a link to which the Adjacency Segment ID is bound.
This field is set to a local link address (IPv4 or IPv6).
For IPv4, this field is 4 octets; for IPv6, this field is 16 octets.
If unnumbered, this field is 4 octets and includes a 32 bit link identifier as defined in [RFC4203] and [RFC5307].
If the Adjacency Segment ID represents Parallel Adjacencies [SR], this field is 4 octets and MUST be set to 4 octets of zeroes.
An identifier that is assigned by the remote LSR for a link on which the Adjacency Segment ID is bound.
This field is set to the remote (downstream neighbor) link address (IPv4 or IPv6).
For IPv4, this field is 4 octets; for IPv6, this field is 16 octets.
If unnumbered, this field is 4 octets and includes a 32 bit link identifier as defined in [RFC4203] and [RFC5307].
If the Adjacency Segment ID represents Parallel Adjacencies [SR], this field is 4 octets and MUST be set to 4 octets of zeroes.
This specifies the Advertising Node Identifier.
When the Protocol field is set to 1, then this field is 4 octets and carries the 32 bit OSPF Router ID.
If the Protocol field is set to 2, then this field is 6 octets and carries the 48 bit
If the Protocol field is set to 0, then this field is 4 octets and MUST be set to zero.
This specifies the downstream node identifier.
When the Protocol field is set to 1, then this field is 4 octets and carries the 32 bit OSPF Router ID.
If the Protocol field is set to 2, then this field is 6 octets and carries the 48 bit
If the Protocol field is set to 0, then this field is 4 octets and MUST be set to zero.
Extension to Downstream Detailed Mapping TLV
In an echo reply, the Downstream Detailed Mapping TLV [RFC8029] is used to report for each interface over which a FEC could be forwarded.
For a FEC, there are multiple protocols that may be used to distribute label mapping.
The Protocol field of the Downstream Detailed Mapping TLV is used to return the protocol that is used to distribute the label carried in the Downstream Label field.
The following protocols are defined in [RFC8029]:
This document adds two new protocols as follows:
This section describes aspects of LSP Ping and Traceroute operations that require further considerations beyond [RFC8029].
When LSP echo request packets are generated by an initiator, FECs carried in the Target
FEC Stack TLV may need to differ to support an SR architecture.
The following defines the Target FEC Stack TLV construction mechanics by an initiator for SR scenarios.
The initiator MUST include FEC(s) corresponding to the destination segment.
The initiator MAY include FECs corresponding to some or all of the segments imposed in the label stack by the initiator to communicate the segments traversed.
The initiator MUST initially include FECs corresponding to all segments imposed in the label stack.
When a received echo reply contains the FEC Stack Change TLV with one or more of the original segments being popped, the initiator MAY remove a corresponding FEC(s) from the Target FEC Stack TLV in the next (TTL 1) traceroute request, as defined in Section 4.6 of [RFC8029].
When a received echo reply does not contain the FEC Stack Change TLV, the initiator MUST NOT attempt to remove any FECs from the Target FEC Stack TLV in the next (TTL 1) traceroute request.
As defined in [SR OSPF] and [SR IS IS], the Prefix SID can be advertised as an absolute value, an index, or as a range.
In any of these cases, the initiator MUST derive the Prefix mapped to the Prefix SID and use it in the IGP Prefix Segment ID defined in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.
How the responder uses the details in the SR FEC
sub TLV to perform the validation is a local implementation matter.
FEC Stack Change Sub TLV [RFC8029] defines
a FEC Stack Change sub TLV that a router must include when the FEC stack changes.
The network node that advertised the Node Segment ID is responsible for generating a FEC Stack Change sub TLV with the Post Office Protocol (POP) operation type for the Node Segment ID, regardless of whether or not Penultimate Hop Popping (PHP) is enabled.
The network node that is immediately downstream of the node that advertised the Adjacency Segment ID is responsible for generating the FEC Stack Change sub TLV for POP operation for the Adjacency Segment ID.
The forwarding semantic of the Node Segment ID with the PHP flag is equivalent to usage of Implicit Null in MPLS protocols.
The Adjacency Segment ID is also similar in a sense that it can be thought of as a locally allocated segment that has PHP enabled when destined for the next hop IGP Adjacency Node.
Procedures described in Section 4.4 of [RFC8029] rely on the Stack D and Stack R explicitly having the Implicit Null value.
Implementations SHOULD use the Implicit Null for the Node Segment ID PHP and Adjacency Segment ID PHP cases.
This section modifies the procedure defined in Section 4.4.1 of [RFC8029].
Step 4 defined in Section 4.4.1 of
[RFC8029] is modified as below: 4.
If the label mapping for FEC is Implicit Null, set the FEC status to 2 and proceed to step 4a.
Otherwise, if the label mapping for FEC is Label L, proceed to step 4a.
Otherwise, set the FEC return code to 10 ("Mapping for this FEC is not the given label at stack depth"), set the FEC status to 1, and return.
Segment Routing IGP Prefix and IGP Adjacency
FEC Stack sub TLV, and if the FEC was advertised with the PHP bit set. /
Validate that the Node Segment ID is advertised for the IPv4 Prefix by IGP Protocol {  When the Protocol field in the received IPv4 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub
TLV is 0, use any locally enabled IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IPv4 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub TLV is 1, use OSPF as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IPv4 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub
TLV is 2, use IS IS as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IPv4 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub TLV is an unrecognized value, it MUST be treated as a Protocol value of 0. }
Validate that the Node Segment ID is advertised with the No PHP flag.
When the Protocol is OSPF, the NP Flag defined in Section 5 of [SR OSPF]
MUST be set to 0.
When the Protocol is IS IS, the P Flag defined in Section 6.1 of [SR IS IS]
MUST be set to 0. }
If it can be determined that no protocol associated with the Interface I would have advertised the FEC Type at FEC stack  depth, set the Best return code to 12, "Protocol not associated with interface at FEC stack depth" and return.
Set FEC Status to 1 and return. }
When the Protocol field in the received IPv4 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub TLV is 1, use OSPF as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IPv4 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub
TLV is 2, use IS IS as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IPv4 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub TLV is an unrecognized value, it MUST be treated as a Protocol value of 0. }
If it can be determined that no protocol associated with Interface I would have advertised the FEC Type at FEC stack  depth, set the Best return code to 12, "Protocol not associated with interface at FEC stack depth" and return.
Set FEC Status to 1 and return. }
The LSR needs to check if it is being a tail end for the LSP and have the prefix advertised with the PHP bit set /  Validate that the Node Segment ID is advertised for the IPv6 Prefix by the IGP protocol {  When the Protocol field in the received IPv6 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub TLV is 0, use any locally enabled IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IPv6 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub TLV is 1, use OSPF as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IPv6 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub
TLV is 2, use IS IS as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IPv6 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub TLV is an unrecognized value, it MUST be treated as a Protocol value of 0. }
Validate that the Node Segment ID is advertised with the No PHP flag.
When the Protocol is OSPF, the NP flag defined in Section 5 of [SR OSPFV3] MUST be set to 0.
When the Protocol is IS IS, the P Flag defined in Section 6.1 of [SR IS IS]
MUST be set to 0. }
If it can be determined that no protocol associated with Interface I would have advertised the FEC Type at FEC stack  depth, set the Best return code to 12, "Protocol not associated with interface at FEC stack depth" and return.
Set the FEC Status to 1 and return. }
When the Protocol field in the received IPv6 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub TLV is 1, use OSPF as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IPv6 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub
TLV is 2, use IS IS as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IPv6 IGP  Prefix Segment ID sub TLV is an unrecognized value, it MUST be treated as a Protocol value of 0. }
If it can be determined that no protocol associated with Interface I would have advertised the FEC Type at FEC stack  depth, set the Best return code to 12, "Protocol not associated with interface at FEC stack depth" and return.
Set the FEC Status to 1 and return. }
Type is 1 (Parallel Adjacency):  Validate that the Receiving Node Identifier is the local IGP identifier.
TLV is 0, use any locally enabled IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IGP  Adjacency Segment ID sub TLV is 1, use OSPF as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IGP  Adjacency Segment ID sub TLV is 2, use IS IS as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IGP  Adjacency Segment ID sub TLV is an unrecognized value, it MUST be treated as a Protocol value of 0. }
Type is 4 or 6 (IGP Adjacency or LAN Adjacency):  Validate that the Remote Interface ID matches the local identifier of the interface (Interface I) on which the packet was received.
Validate that the Receiving Node Identifier is the local IGP identifier.
TLV is 0, use any locally enabled IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IGP  Adjacency Segment ID sub TLV is 1, use OSPF as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IGP  Adjacency Segment ID sub TLV is 2, use IS IS as the IGP protocol.
When the Protocol field in the received IGP  Adjacency Segment ID sub TLV is an unrecognized value, it MUST be treated as a Protocol value of 0. }
Set the FEC Status to 1 and return. }
The LSP Traceroute operation can properly traverse every hop of the SR network for the Uniform Model as described in [RFC3443].
If one or more LSRs employ a Short Pipe Model, as described in [RFC3443], then the LSP Traceroute may not be able to properly traverse every hop of the SR network due to the absence of TTL copy operation when the outer label is popped.
The Short Pipe is one of the most commonly used models.
The following TTL manipulation technique MAY be used when the Short Pipe Model is used.
When tracing an LSP according to the procedures in [RFC8029], the TTL is incremented by one in order to trace the path sequentially along the LSP.
However, when a source routed LSP has to be traced, there are as many TTLs as there are labels in the stack.
The LSR that initiates the traceroute SHOULD start by setting the TTL to 1 for the tunnel in the LSP's label stack
it wants to start the tracing from, the TTL of all outer labels in the stack to the max value, and the TTL of all the inner labels in the stack to zero.
Thus, a typical start to the traceroute would have a TTL of 1 for the outermost label and
all the inner labels would have a TTL of 0.
If the FEC Stack TLV is included, it should contain only those for the inner stacked tunnels.
FEC Stack Change TLV should be used to diagnose the tunnel as described in [RFC8029].
When the tracing of a tunnel in the stack is complete, then the next tunnel in the stack should be traced.
The end of a tunnel can be detected from the Return Code when it indicates that the responding LSR is an egress for the stack at depth 1.
Thus, the traceroute procedures in [RFC8029] can be recursively applied to traceroute a source routed LSP.
Backward Compatibility with Non SR Devices [INTEROP] describes how SR operates in a network where SR capable and non SR
In such networks, there may not be any FEC mapping in the responder when the initiator is SR capable, while the responder is not (or vice versa).
But this is not different from RSVP and LDP interoperation scenarios.
When LSP Ping is triggered, the responder will set the FEC return code to Return 4, "
Replying router has no mapping for the FEC at stack depth".
Similarly, when an SR capable node assigns Adj SID for a non SR
capable node, the LSP traceroute may fail as the non SR capable node is not aware of the "IGP Adjacency Segment ID" sub TLV and may not reply with the FEC Stack Change sub TLVs.
This may result in any further downstream nodes replying back with a Return Code of 4, "Replying router has no mapping for the FEC at stack depth".
New Target FEC Stack Sub TLVs IANA has assigned three new sub TLVs from the "sub TLVs for TLV Types 1, 16, and 21" subregistry of the "Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS)
IGP Prefix Segment ID   Section 5.2 36
Protocol in the Segment ID Sub TLV IANA has created a new "Protocol in the Segment ID
(see Section 5) registry under the "Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS)
Code points in the range of 0 250 will be assigned by Standards Action [RFC8126].
The range of 251 254 is reserved for experimental use and will not be assigned.
The value of 255 is marked "Reserved".
Adjacency Type in the IGP Adjacency Segment ID IANA has created a new "Adjacency Type in the IGP Adjacency Segment ID" registry (see Section 5.3) under the "Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS)
Code points in the range of 0 250 will be assigned by Standards Action.
The range of 251 254 is reserved for experimental use and will not be assigned.
The value of 255 is marked "Reserved".
The initial entries into the registry are:
Protocol in the Label Stack Sub TLV of the Downstream Detailed Mapping
TLV IANA has created a new "Protocol in the Label Stack sub TLV of the Downstream Detailed Mapping TLV" registry under the "Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS)
Code points in the range of 0 250 will be assigned by Standards Action.
The range of 251 254 is reserved for experimental use and will not be assigned.
The value of 255 is marked "Reserved".
The initial entries into the registry are:
Return Code IANA has assigned a new Return Code from the "Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) Label Switched Paths (LSPs)
Ping Parameters" in the 0 191 (Standards Action) range from the "Return Codes" subregistry.
This document defines additional MPLS LSP Ping sub TLVs and follows the mechanisms defined in [RFC8029].
All the security considerations defined in [RFC8029] will be applicable for this document and, in addition, they do not impose any additional security challenges to be considered.
The following are key contributors to this document: Hannes Gredler, RtBrick,
Inc. Tarek Saad, Cisco Systems,
Inc. Siva Sivabalan, Cisco Systems,
Inc. Balaji Rajagopalan, Juniper Networks Faisal Iqbal, Cisco Systems, Inc.
