Abstract Routing information reduction by BGP Route Reflection or Confederation can result in persistent internal BGP route oscillations with certain routing setups and network topologies.
This document specifies two sets of additional paths that can be used to eliminate these route oscillations in a network.
As documented in [RFC3345], routing information reduction by BGP Route Reflection [RFC4456] or BGP Confederation [RFC5065] can result in persistent Internal BGP (IBGP) route oscillations with certain routing setups and network topologies.
Except for a couple of artificially engineered network topologies, the MULTI EXIT DISC (MED) attribute [RFC4271] has played a pivotal role in virtually all known persistent IBGP route oscillations.
For the sake of brevity, we use the term "MED induced route oscillation" hereafter to refer to a persistent IBGP route oscillation in which the MED plays a role.
In order to eliminate MED induced route oscillations and to achieve consistent routing in a network, a route reflector or a confederation Autonomous System Border Router (ASBR) needs to advertise more than just the best path for an address prefix.
Our goal is to identify the necessary set of paths for an address prefix that needs to be advertised by a route reflector or a confederation ASBR to prevent the condition.
In this document, we describe two sets of paths for an address prefix that can be advertised by a BGP route reflector or confederation ASBR to eliminate MED induced route oscillations in a network.
The first set involves all the available paths, and would achieve the same routing consistency as the full IBGP mesh.
The second set, which is a subset of the first one, involves the neighbor AS based Group Best Paths, and would be sufficient to eliminate MED induced route oscillations (subject to certain commonly adopted topological constraints).
These paths can be advertised using the mechanism described in ADD PATH [RFC7911] for advertising multiple paths.
No other assumptions in functionality beyond the base BGP specification [RFC4271] are made.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
All the Available Paths Observe that in a network that maintains a full IBGP mesh, all the BGP speakers have consistent and equivalent routing information.
Such a network is thus free of MED induced route oscillations and other routing inconsistencies such as forwarding loops.
Therefore, one approach is to allow a route reflector or a confederation ASBR to advertise all the available paths for an address prefix.
Clearly this approach would yield the same amount of routing information and achieve the same routing consistency as the full IBGP mesh in a network.
In this document, "Available Paths" refers to the advertisement of all the available paths.
This approach can be implemented using the mechanism described in ADD PATH [RFC7911] for advertising multiple paths for certain prefixes.
For the sake of scalability, the advertisement of multiple paths should be limited to those prefixes that are affected by MED induced route oscillation in a network carrying a large number of alternate paths.
A detailed description of how these oscillations can occur can be found in [RFC3345]; the description of how a node would locally detect such conditions is outside the scope of this document.
Advertise the Group Best Paths
The term "neighbor AS" for a route refers to the neighboring autonomous system (AS) from which the route was received.
The calculation of the neighbor AS is specified in Section 9.1.2.2 of [RFC4271], and Section 5.3 of [RFC5065].
By definition, the MED is comparable only among routes with the same neighbor AS.
Thus, the route selection procedures specified in [RFC4271] would conceptually involve two steps: first, organize the paths for an address prefix into groups according to their respective neighbor ASes, and calculate the most preferred one (termed "Group Best Path") for each of the groups; then, calculate the overall best path among all the Group Best Paths.
As a practice that is generally recommended (in [RFC4456] and [RFC5065]) and widely adopted, a route reflection cluster or a confederation sub
AS should be designed such that BGP routes from within the cluster (or confederation sub AS) are preferred over routes from other clusters (or confederation sub AS) when the decision is based on the IGP cost to the BGP NEXT HOP.
This is typically done by setting IGP metrics for links within a cluster (or confederation sub AS) to be much smaller than the IGP metrics for the links between the clusters (or confederation sub AS).
This practice helps achieve consistent routing within a route reflection cluster or a confederation sub AS.
When the aforementioned practice for devising a route reflection cluster or confederation sub AS is followed in a network, we claim that the advertisement of all the Group Best Paths by a route reflector or a confederation ASBR is sufficient to eliminate MED induced route oscillations in the network.
This claim is validated in Appendix A. Note that a Group Best Path for an address prefix can be identified by the combination of the address prefix and the neighbor AS.
Thus, this approach can be implemented using the mechanism described in ADD PATH [RFC7911] for advertising multiple paths, and in this case, the neighbor AS of a path may be used as the path identifier of the path.
It should be noted that the approach of advertising the Group Best Paths requires certain topological constraints to be satisfied in order to eliminate MED induced route oscillation.
Specific topological considerations are described in [RFC3345].
To allow a route reflector or a confederation ASBR to advertise either the Available Paths or Group Best Paths using the mechanism described in ADD PATH [RFC7911], the following revisions are proposed for BGP Route Reflection and BGP Confederation.
For a particular <Address Family Identifier (AFI), Subsequent Address Family (SAFI)>, a route reflector MUST include the <AFI, SAFI> with the "Send/Receive" field set to 2 (send multiple paths) or 3 (send/receive multiple paths) in the ADD PATH Capability [RFC7911] advertised to an IBGP peer.
When the ADD PATH Capability is also received from the IBGP peer with the "Send/Receive" field set to 1 (receive multiple paths) or 3 (send/receive multiple paths) for the same <AFI, SAFI>, then the following procedures apply: If the peer is a route reflection client, the route reflector MUST advertise to the peer the Group Best Paths (or the Available Paths) received from its non client IBGP peers.
The route reflector MAY also advertise to the peer the Group Best Paths (or the Available Paths) received from its clients.
If the peer is a non client, the route reflector MUST advertise to the peer the Group Best Paths (or the Available Paths) received from its clients.
For a particular <AFI, SAFI>, a confederation ASBR MUST include the <AFI, SAFI> with the "Send/Receive" field set to 2 (send multiple paths) or 3 (send/receive multiple paths) in the ADD PATH Capability [RFC7911] advertised to an IBGP peer, and to a confederation external peer.
When the ADD PATH Capability is also received from the IBGP peer or the confederation external peer with the "Send/Receive" field set to 1 (receive multiple paths) or 3 (send/receive multiple paths) for the same <AFI, SAFI>, then the following procedures apply: If the peer is internal, the confederation ASBR MUST advertise to the peer the Group Best Paths (or the Available Paths) received from its confederation external peers.
If the peer is confederation external, the confederation ASBR MUST advertise to the peer the Group Best Paths (or the Available Paths) received from its IBGP peers.
Some route oscillations, once detected, can be eliminated by simple configuration workarounds.
As carrying additional paths impacts the memory usage and routing convergence in a network, it is recommended that the impact be evaluated and the approach of using a configuration workaround be considered in deciding whether to deploy the proposed mechanism in a network.
In addition, the advertisement of multiple paths should be limited to those prefixes that are affected by MED induced route oscillation.
While the route reflectors or confederation ASBRs in a network need to advertise the Group Best Paths or Available Paths, the vast majority of the BGP speakers in the network only need to receive the Group Best Paths or Available Paths, which would involve only minor software changes.
It should be emphasized that, in order to eliminate MED induced route oscillations in a network using the approach of advertising the Group Best Paths, the recommended practice for devising a route reflection cluster or confederation sub AS with respect to the IGP metrics ([RFC4456] [RFC5065]) should be followed.
It is expected that the approach of advertising the Group Best Paths would be adequate to achieve consistent routing for the vast majority of the networks.
For a network that has a large number of alternate paths, the approach should be a good choice as the number of paths advertised by a reflector or a confederation ASBR is bounded by the number of the neighbor ASes for a particular address prefix.
The additional states for an address prefix would also be per neighbor AS rather than per path.
The number of neighbor ASes for a particular address prefix is typically small because of the limited number of upstream providers for a customer and the nature of advertising only customer routes at the inter exchange points.
The approach of advertising the Group Best Paths, however, may still be inadequate for certain networks to avoid other routing inconsistencies such as forwarding loops.
The required topological constraints could also be operationally challenging.
In these cases the approach of advertising the Available Paths may be used, but should be limited to those prefixes that are affected by MED induced route oscillation in a network carrying a large number of alternate paths.
This extension to BGP does not change the underlying security issues inherent in the existing BGP [RFC4271].
Why the Group Best Paths Are Adequate
It is assumed that the following common practice is followed.
A route reflection cluster or a confederation sub
AS should be designed such that the IGP metrics for links within a cluster (or confederation sub AS) are much smaller than the IGP metrics for the links between the clusters (or confederation sub AS).
This practice helps achieve consistent routing within a route reflection cluster or a confederation sub AS.
Observe that in a network that maintains full IBGP mesh only, the paths that survive the (Local Pref, AS PATH Length, Origin, and MED
) comparisons [RFC4271] would contribute to route selection in the network.
Consider a route reflection cluster that sources one or more paths that would survive the (Local Pref, AS PATH Length, Origin, and MED) comparisons among all the paths in the network.
One of these surviving paths would be selected as the Group Best Path by the route reflector in the cluster.
Due to the constraint on the IGP metrics as described previously, this path would remain as the Group Best Path and would be advertised to all other clusters even after a path is received from another cluster.
On the other hand, when no path in a route reflection cluster would survive the (Local Pref, AS PATH Length, Origin, and MED) comparisons among all the paths in the network,
the Group Best Path (when it exists) for a route reflector would be from another cluster.
Clearly, the advertisement of the Group Best Path by the route reflector to the clients only depends on the paths received from other clusters.
Therefore, there is no MED induced route oscillation in the network as the advertisement of a Group Best Path to a peer
does not depend on the paths received from that peer.
The claim for the confederation can be validated similarly.
