Abstract This document provides implementation guidelines for the use of return codes in RFC 3435, Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP)
Return codes in RFC 3435 do not cover all possible specific situations that may ever occur in a gateway.
That is not possible and not necessary.
What is important is to ensure that the Call Agent that receives a return code behaves appropriately and consistently for the given situation.
The purpose of this document is to provide implementation guidelines to ensure that consistency.
This document provides implementation guidelines for the use of return codes in the Media Gateway Control Protocol
Return codes in [1] do not cover all possible specific situations that may ever occur in the gateway.
That is not possible and not necessary.
What is important is to ensure that the Call Agent that receives that return code behaves appropriately and consistently for the situation that occurred.
The solution described in this document is to categorize return codes that gateways return based on the expected behavior for the Call Agents that receive them.
Categorizing errors helps both Call Agent and gateway developers: it helps gateway developers choose an appropriate return code when a specific one for the situation is not available; it also helps Call Agent developers ensure that there is consistent behavior for the return code that is received.
In addition to categorizing return codes (section 2.1), section 2.2 provides a consolidated list of return codes in terms of "situations" that may have triggered and the "categories" that they fall under.
This provides some additional implementation guidelines for the use of these return codes.
Section 2.3 includes a summary of the return codes and their categories.
Section 3 provides some additional implementation guidelines for Call Agent and gateway developers.
The following categorizes return codes from gateways based on expected Call Agent behavior.
Category normal: These return codes are used in normal operation and do not represent error conditions.
Category none (specific errors requiring specific action): A return code associated with a specific situation in the gateway that will invoke a corresponding specific Call Agent behavior.
As such, these return codes are not categorized into a common behavioral category.
Category "Service Failure": A category in which the endpoint is either out of service or the treatment by the Call Agent is expected to be the same as for an out of service endpoint.
A situation where the gateway has indicated that it does not support what the Call Agent has asked it to do.
This may be caused by a lack of synchronization between the provisioning of the Call Agent and the gateway.
Note that attempts should be made to weed out these types of error situations during integration testing.
The transient nature of this error is such that this particular call is likely to be permanently affected but later calls on the same endpoint may proceed successfully.
Typically the situation that caused this error is not going to disappear unless there is some change in state in the gateway or network
(e.g., more bandwidth becomes available, more CPU resources become available etc.).
This situation is not likely to change in a few 10's of milliseconds but could change within some number of seconds or minutes later (as resources become free), i.e., within the time period that you might expect a different call to be tried on that endpoint.
A case where there is a state mismatch between the Call Agent and the gateway that can be resolved by the Call Agent making a request that is more appropriate to the gateway state.
Although categorized with a common category indicator the behavior of the Call Agent will depend on the situation (the type of state mismatch that has occurred as well as other state information, e.g., call state).
Category "Remote Connection Descriptor Error": This indicates some mismatch between the two gateways involved in the call.
Note that per RFC 2327, all gateways should ignore SDP attributes that they do not recognize (i.e., lack of recognition of an SDP attribute should not be the cause of an error indication).
The exact behavior of the Call Agent for the above categories may depend on the type of endpoint (analog, ISUP trunk, CAS trunk, etc.), whether this is the originating or terminating endpoint in the call and possibly other information related to call state.
This document does not attempt to outline the Call Agent behavior based on call state.
Instead, it just recommends that the Call Agent behavior be consistent based on a combination of call state and the specific category of error received.
Return Code Situations and Categories
This section describes return codes in MGCP 1.0 [1] in terms of "situations" that may have triggered that return code and "categories" to which the return code belongs.
The purpose is to provide developers additional guidelines for return code use.
Note that any indication that a response is valid for a NotificationRequest (RQNT) is also an indication that it is valid for a connection handling request, i.e., CreateConnection (CRCX), ModifyConnection (MDCX), or DeleteConnection (DLCX) with an encapsulated RQNT.
The same holds for the EndpointConfiguration (EPCF) command.
If the final response that follows a provisional response contains an empty response acknowledgement parameter, a Response Acknowledgement is used to acknowledge the final response (section 3.5.6 of [1]).
100 Transaction in progress Response valid for:
Any command that may result in a long transaction execution time,
e.g., more than 200 ms. Situation:
When a transaction is expected to take a processing time that is beyond the normal retry timer, the gateway will return a provisional response.
A final response will be provided later, after the transaction has completed.
Refer to section 3.5.6 of [1].
An example of this might be a CreateConnection command using RSVP, where the time to create the connection may be longer than usual because of the need to perform the network resource reservation.
As described in [1], Section 4.4.8, we assume that Call Agents and gateways conceptually maintain a queue of incoming transactions to be executed.
Associated with this transaction queue is a high water and a low water mark.
Once the queue length reaches the high water mark, the entity should start issuing 101 provisional responses (transaction queued) until the queue length drops to the low water mark.
This applies to new transactions as well as to retransmissions.
A final response will be provided later, after the transaction has completed.
In this case, the Call Agent should throttle back its request rate for this gateway.
200 Transaction executed normally Response valid for:
Normal response as a result of successful execution.
The 250 response code can be used to acknowledge a successful completion of a DeleteConnection command.
However, a 200 response code is also appropriate.
Response to a successful DeleteConnection command.
A more specific error code should be used if one is available since this error code provides very little information.
If used, some specific commentary should be included to aid in debug.
This is returned in response to a request for an off hook transition requested event when the phone is already off hook.
It is also returned when a request is made to generate a signal that has an explicit on hook precondition in the signal definition, such as the ringing signal ("rg") in the Line package [2].
It is also returned when requesting an incoming off hook/seizure indication for a Channel Associated Signaling (CAS) trunk when the incoming hook state for that trunk is already off hook.
If the Call Agent makes the request with a requested event indicating a different hook state, the request should not result in this return code again.
Situation: This is returned in response to a request for an on  hook or
hook flash requested event when the phone is already on hook.
It is also returned when a request is made to generate a signal that has an explicit off hook precondition in the signal definition, such as the dial tone ("dl") in the Line package [2].
It is also returned when requesting an incoming on hook indication for a CAS trunk when the incoming hook state for that trunk is already on hook.
If the Call Agent makes the request with a requested event indicating a different hook  state, the request should not result in this error again.
This is returned if the request cannot be processed due to a temporary lack of gateway resources, such as CPU utilization, DSP resources, memory etc; however, the command may succeed at a later time when resources free up.
Note that lack of network resources should not result in this code (i.e., return code
404 would be more appropriate).
404 Insufficient bandwidth at this time.
This is an indication that there is not enough bandwidth available to sustain the call.
It is as a result of some failed bandwidth check (could be RSVP or some other mechanism).
It is possible that the Call Agent could request a codec requiring lower bandwidth codec and have a successful result.
Alternatively, it could treat this as a "Temporary Failure" for this codec.
Although categorized under this general category, note that the Call Agent could apply some specific behavior (try a lower bandwidth codec) depending on policy.
It may be returned to requests made when the endpoint is in service and has initiated the restart procedures (see [1], Section 4.4.6)
but the procedure has not yet completed.
If the request is made at a later time, it may be "successful" but may not be appropriate (because of possible state mismatch).
The Call Agent should proceed after it believes the restart procedure has completed.
The transaction took longer than expected and has been aborted.
An example might be a transaction where a provisional response (100 response code) was returned.
Following that, the gateway determined that the actual transaction was taking longer than should reasonably be expected and as a result it aborted the transaction and returned 406 as the final response.
If this error code is returned repeatedly, it could indicate a more serious problem.
407 Transaction aborted by some external action.
This is returned to indicate cancellation of a pending request (see [1] Section 4.4.4).
For example, DeleteConnection is received while processing a CreateConnection or ModifyConnection.
Also, if either a ModifyConnection, NotificationRequest, or EndpointConfiguration command is in progress, and the same command is received with a different transaction Id, 407 will be returned.
Category: none (specific situation and behavior).
Gateway is overloaded (e.g., too many requests per second from the Call Agent) and is unable to process any more transactions at this time.
In this case, the Call Agent SHOULD throttle back its request rate for this gateway as described in [1], Section 4.4.8.
Note that although the Call Agent behavior with respect to the call being set up corresponds to this general category, there is some specific Call Agent behavior implied as well (i.e., the Call Agent throttling back).
No endpoint available Response valid for: CreateConnection using an "any of" wildcard.
A CreateConnection request was made with an "any of" (
no endpoint was available to execute the request.
As described in [1], Section 2.3.5, when the "any of" wildcard is used with the CreateConnection command, the endpoint assigned MUST be in service and MUST NOT already have any connections on it.
Category: none (specific situation and behavior).
There is no endpoint matching the EndpointId provided with the command.
This could be the result of a provisioning mismatch between the Call Agent and the gateway or it could be because a card was removed from the gateway so that the endpoint is no longer available (in which case a RestartInProgress should be received, although the Call Agent cannot depend on this).
Note that the endpoint is not just out  of service (in which case 501 would be used); it is completely unknown/unavailable to the MGCP.
This is returned if the endpoint is in a permanent "not ready" state.
This includes maintenance states such as out of service.
Note that an endpoint that has initiated the restart procedure is in service, and hence should not use this return code, even if the restart procedure has not yet completed (see [1], Section 4.4.5).
This is returned when the endpoint does not have sufficient resources and future requests on this endpoint are expected to fail, meaning some resources dedicated to the endpoint are broken (e.g., return code 529 "hardware failure" might be a more specific indication).
For situations where resources may become available in the future (i.e., resources are pooled and not available at the present time), return code 403 should be used instead.
"All of" wildcard too complicated.
This is returned when the wildcard convention used in the request is understood, but the requested command cannot be processed with the specified wildcarding.
An example of this would be a NotificationRequest with a request such that a failure would make it too difficult to roll back the state of all the endpoints to what they were prior to the request.
Category: Normally treated as a "Provisioning Mismatch".
Note however, that the Call Agent could treat it differently by recovering with some specific behavior (e.g., generate a number of individual requests without wildcards instead of a single one with the wildcard).
504 Unknown or unsupported command.
A command was requested other than those specified in the MGCP specification [1], and the command is not supported.
505 Unsupported remote connection descriptor.
Response valid for: CreateConnection, ModifyConnection.
One or more mandatory parameters or values in the RemoteConnectionDescriptor are not supported by the gateway.
Note that, per [3], unsupported attribute lines must be ignored and hence should not result in any errors.
506 Inability to satisfy both local connection options and remote connection descriptor simultaneously.
Response valid for: CreateConnection, ModifyConnection.
The LocalConnectionOptions and RemoteConnectionDescriptor contain one or more mandatory parameters or values that conflict with each other and/or cannot be supported at the same time (except for codec negotiation failure
Note that this error code SHOULD only be used if there is no other more specific error code for the unsupported functionality.
Any situation where a request from the Call Agent is not supported by the gateway beyond the situations already covered by other more specific return codes.
508 Unknown or unsupported quarantine handling.
The endpoint does not support or does not recognize the requested quarantine handling.
509 Error in RemoteConnectionDescriptor Response valid for: CreateConnection, ModifyConnection.
Situation: There is a syntax or semantic error in the Remote Connection Descriptor.
For example, there is no IP address for an RTP media stream.
Category: "Remote Connection Descriptor Error".
Some unspecified protocol error was detected.
Gateways should use this error as a last resort since it provides very little information.
If used, some specific commentary should be included to aid in debug.
It is returned if the requested command contains an unrecognized mandatory parameter extension ("X ").
In MGCP 1.0, this specifically refers to unrecognized parameters, since other error codes are available for unrecognized connection modes (517), unrecognized packages (518), unrecognized local connection options (541), etc.
512 Gateway not equipped to detect one of the requested events.
A valid event was requested however the gateway is not equipped to detect this event (i.e., the package is only implemented partially).
Of course, such an implementation would not conform to [1].
Note that if an invalid event was requested, i.e., an event not defined in the relevant package, then error code 522 should be used.
Also note, that if the package is unknown or unsupported, then error code 518 should be used.
513 gateway is not equipped to generate one of the requested signals.
A valid signal was requested, however the gateway is not equipped to generate this signal (i.e., the package is only implemented partially).
Of course, such an implementation would not conform to [1].
Note that if an invalid signal was requested, i.e., a signal not defined in the relevant package, then error code 522 should be used.
Also note, that if the package is unknown or unsupported, then error code 518 should be used.
The gateway cannot send the specified announcement.
This is a specific situation with respect to playing announcements on an endpoint or connection associated with the endpoint.
Error code 538 could be used instead.
An unknown connection id has been specified.
It is possible that the connection has already been deleted.
It should be noted that a connection id can also supplied with events and signals (e.g., "S: L/rt@connId").
Note that a mismatch between connection id and call id should use error code 516.
516 Unknown or incorrect call id.
Response valid for: ModifyConnection, DeleteConnection.
Unknown call id, or the call id supplied is incorrect (e.g., connection id not associated with this call
517 Invalid or unsupported mode.
This is returned if the command specifies a connection mode that the endpoint does not support (note that not all endpoints will support all modes).
Note that if the unsupported mode is an extension connection mode, error code 518
(unsupported package) should be used instead.
518 Unsupported or unknown package.
A package name included in a request is not supported (or unknown).
Note that the package name may be a prefix to an event or other things (e.g., a parameter) as defined in [1].
Note that it is recommended to include a PackageList parameter with a list of supported packages in the response.
519 Endpoint does not have a digit map.
Request was made to detect digits based on a digit map and the gateway does not have a digit map.
The Call Agent needs to send down a digit map in order to continue with the call.
This is normally a transient error in which error code 405 SHOULD be used.
Gateways SHOULD not use this error code unless there is some relevant situation that warrants the category of "Service Failure".
Note that this was included in [1] only to maintain backwards compatibility with previous releases of the MGCP specification.
If it is returned, this return code will be treated as category "Service Failure", i.e., as if this endpoint is out of service.
521 Endpoint re directed to another Call Agent.
A RestartInProgress command was sent to the Call Agent and the Call Agent returns this return code along with a NotifiedEntity parameter pointing to another Call Agent.
The gateway then sends a new RestartInProgress command to the Call Agent specified in the Notified Entity.
No such event or signal.
This is returned if the requested event/signal name is not registered with this package.
If on the other hand the signal or event is part of the package but is not supported by the gateway, then return
code 512 or 513 SHOULD be provided instead.
If the package is not supported, return code 518 SHOULD be returned.
523 Unknown action or illegal combination of actions.
Response valid for: NotificationRequest with one or more requested events.
Request was made with a requested event(s) that included an action or actions defined in [1] that are either unknown, unsupported or an illegal combination as indicated in section 2.3.3 of [1].
Note that unsupported extension actions should generate error code 518 (unsupported package).
This is returned if one or more of the LocalConnectionOptions (LCO) parameters are coded with values that are not consistent with each other (e.g., other LCO parameters inconsistent with the network type).
525 Unknown extension in Local Connection Options.
Response valid for: CreateConnection, ModifyConnection.
This is returned if the request contains a Local Connection Option with one or more unrecognized mandatory ("x ") extensions.
Note that unsupported package extensions should use error code 518 (unsupported package) instead.
In most cases where there is insufficient bandwidth, a 404 return code should be used.
526 would be used in cases where future requests are destined to fail.
An example might be a very restricted bandwidth case, where there is not enough bandwidth available for the codec requested even for a single endpoint.
Making a request with the same codec in the future will fail.
However, making a request for some other codec (with a higher degree of compression) may pass.
For cases, where the bandwidth is pooled over multiple endpoints and could free up at some future time (because an endpoint becomes inactive), then 404 is more appropriate.
If it is returned, this return code will be treated as category "Provisioning Mismatch", e.g., the codec was incorrectly provisioned for the bandwidth available.
Response valid for: CreateConnection, ModifyConnection, NotificationRequest.
Situation: This is returned if the connection has not yet received a RemoteConnectionDescriptor when one is required to support the request.
This can for example happen if a connection is attempted to be placed in "send/receive mode", or if a signal is applied on a connection.
Alternatively, if this is an initial request made by a Call Agent (such there is no remote connection descriptor), then this is a "State Mismatch" problem.
A command was received with a protocol version that was not supported.
This could also be treated as a "State Mismatch" problem if the there is a recovery mechanism (e.g., Call Agent recognizes the protocol version mismatch and switches to the correct protocol version) 529 Internal Hardware Error.
A hardware fault occurred during the execution of a command such that repeating this command will result in a failure indication once again.
This is a slightly more specific error code than error 502, although more commentary should be provided (for debug purposes) if possible.
530 CAS Signaling Protocol Error.
This is specific to Channel Associated Signaling (CAS) interfaces.
A typical example might be an attempt to outpulse digits failed for some reason.
531 Failure of a grouping of trunks (e.g., facility failure)
Request made to an endpoint that has a failed trunk connection (e.g., T1 or E1 failed).
Note that an RSIP should have been sent as a result of the facility failure.
This is a more specific response than return code 501.
532 Unsupported value(s) in Local Connection Options.
Response valid for: CreateConnection, ModifyConnection.
This is returned if one or more of the LocalConnectionOptions parameters are coded with a value that the gateway does not support.
Situation: This would only be likely to occur in the case of an audit where the maximum response packet size would end up being too large.
534 Codec negotiation failure Response valid for: CreateConnection, ModifyConnection.
The intersection between the list of codecs that the gateway supports, the codecs allowed by the local connection options and the codecs supplied in the Remote Connection Descriptor (if provided) is empty.
Normally this error should not be generated since if the gateway is unable to support the packetization period specified in the local connection options for the codec indicated, it should follow the behavior specified in [1] (which is to pick an appropriate value rather than failing the request).
536 Unknown or unsupported Restart Method Response valid for: RestartInProgress.
This error is generated by the Call Agent if it receives a RestartInProgress command with an unsupported restart method.
Note that if the restart method is an extension restart method, error code 518 (unsupported package) should be used instead.
537 Unknown or unsupported digit map extension Response valid for: NotificationRequest.
Digit map letter in the digit map unknown or unsupported.
Note that this code does apply to extension digit map letters as well.
It is returned if the event/signal parameter is in error or not supported.
If the event/signal or a package is not supported, then one of 512, 513, 518, or 522 should be used instead.
This is returned if the command contains an invalid or unsupported parameter, which is neither a package (which would use return code 518) nor vendor specific extension (which would use return code 511).
For example, if an endpoint does not support the BearerInformation parameter of the EndpointConfiguration command, this return code could be used.
Of course, such an implementation would not conform to [1].
540 Per endpoint connection limit exceeded Response valid for: CreateConnection.
A CreateConnection command was made, but the gateway cannot support any additional connections on that endpoint.
This is returned if the command contains an invalid or unsupported LocalConnectionOption, which is neither a package (which would use return code 518) nor vendor specific extension (which would use return code 511).
Summary of Return Code Categories
A summary of the categories of the various error codes is included in the following table.
This information is also repeated in the detailed error descriptions in the next section.
Temporary    400, 403, 404 , 405,
503: rather than treating this as a "Provisioning Mismatch", it is possible for the Call Agent to recover from this error.
: See the detailed description for this error code in section 2.2.
This could be treated as a "State Mismatch" depending on the circumstances.
: See the detailed description for this error code in section 2.2.
This could be treated as a "State Mismatch" depending on the circumstances.
: See the note on error code 534 in the detailed description section (2.2) of this document (may be treated as a "Remote Connection Descriptor Error" if no local connection options were supplied).
This section provides additional guidelines to Gateway and Call Agent developers.
Also for category "State Mismatch", it is equally important that the situation (and state) is accurately mapped to the specific error code.
For situations similar to those involving return codes in "Service Failure", Provisioning Mismatch", "Temporary Failure" and "Remote Connection Descriptor Error" categories, the gateway should make sure that it uses a return code in the correct category.
MGCP allows additional commentary to be included with the return code.
It is important that the gateway includes more specific information concerning the situation for debug purposes.
It is recommended that return codes 502, 520 and 526 not be used unless there is something that makes these permanent situations.
As indicated in the detailed description of these return codes, 403, 405 and 404 respectively are more appropriate in almost all situations.
If a gateway presently uses 502, 520 and 526 for temporary situations and expects to upgrade to 403, 405 and 404, the gateway should refrain from using 502, 520 and 526 for some other use immediately after the upgrade.
This is to avoid problems where a Call Agent is expected to treat the same error code in two different ways, e.g., 403 is a category "Temporary Failure" which requires a different Call Agent behavior from 502 which is in category "Service Failure".
based on the first digit in the return code as outlined in [1].
For categories "Service Failure", "Provisioning Mismatch", "Temporary Failure", and "Remote Connection Descriptor Error", Call Agents are expected to treat return codes that are within the same category in the same way (i.e., make the same decision, based on the return code and other state information available to them).
Because there was little guidance given for return codes 502, 520 and 526 in RFC 2705 [4], Call Agents may have to treat these as 403, 405 and 404 respectively for gateways that have not been updated according to [1] and these recommendations.
The gateway implementer should be consulted for information on the gateway behavior for (now and in the future) for these return codes (i.e., it may be that return codes 502, 520 and 526 are presently used incorrectly but will be replaced with 403, 405 and 404 in the future).
Security Considerations This document merely provides a convenient way to categorize MGCP return codes in order to facilitate decisions related to failure conditions; it does not impact MGCP security in any way.
