Abstract In MPLS and MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP) environments, statically provisioned Single Segment Pseudowires (SS PWs) are protected against tunnel failure via MPLS level and MPLS TP level tunnel protection.
With statically provisioned Multi Segment Pseudowires (MS PWs), each segment of the MS PW is likewise protected from tunnel failures via MPLS level and MPLS TP level tunnel protection.
However, static MS  PWs are not protected end to end against failure of one of the Switching Provider Edge Routers (S PEs) along the path of the MS PW.
This document describes how to achieve this protection via redundant MS PWs by updating the existing procedures in RFC 6870.
It also contains an optional approach based on MPLS TP Linear Protection.
In MPLS and MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP)
Packet Switched Networks (PSNs), pseudowires (PWs) are transported by MPLS( TP) Label Switched Paths (LSPs), also known as tunnels.
As described in RFC 5659 [RFC5659], Multi Segment Pseudowires (MS  PWs) consist of Terminating Provider Edge Routers PEs (T PEs), one or more Switching Provider Edge Routers (S PEs), and a sequence of tunneled PW segments that connects one of the T PEs with its "adjacent" S PE, connects this S PE with the next S PE in the sequence, and so on until the last S PE is connected by the last PW segment to the remaining T PE.
In MPLS and MPLS TP environments, statically provisioned Single Segment Pseudowires (SS PWs) are protected against tunnel failure via MPLS level and MPLS TP level tunnel protection.
With statically provisioned Multi Segment Pseudowires (MS PWs), each PW segment of the MS PW is likewise protected from tunnel failure via MPLS level and MPLS TP level tunnel protection.
However, tunnel protection does not protect static MS  PWs from failures of S PEs along the path of the MS PW.
[RFC6718] provides a general framework for PW protection, and RFC 6870
[RFC6870], which is based upon that framework, describes protection procedures for MS PWs that are dynamically signaled using LDP.
This document describes how to achieve protection against S PE failure in a static MS PW by extending RFC 6870 to be applicable for statically provisioned MS PWs pseudowires (PWs) as well.
This document also contains an OPTIONAL alternative approach based on MPLS TP Linear Protection.
This approach, described in Appendix A, MUST be identically provisioned in the PE endpoints for the protected MS PW in order to be used.
See Appendix A for further details on this alternative approach.
This document differs from [PW REDUNDANCY] in that it provides end  to end resiliency for static MS PWs, whereas [PW REDUNDANCY] provides resiliency at intermediate S PEs and resiliency for both dynamically signaled and static MS PWs.
PWs based on the Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol Version 3 (L2TPv3) are outside the scope of this document.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
2.  Extension to RFC 6870 to Protect
In this figure, Customer Edge Router 1 (CE1) is connected to T PE1, and CE2 is connected to T PE2 via Attachment Circuits (ACs).
There are three MS PWs.
PW1 is switched at S PE1, PW2 is switched at S PE2, and PW3 is switched at S PE3.
This scenario provides N:1 protection against S PE failure for the subset of the path of the emulated service from T PE1 to T PE2.
The procedures in RFCs 6718 and 6870 rely on LDP based PW status signaling to signal the state of the primary MS PW that is being protected, and the precedence in which redundant MS PW(s) should be used to protect the primary MS PW should it fail.
These procedures make use of information carried by the PW Status TLV, which, for dynamically signaled PWs, is carried by the LDP.
However, statically provisioned PWs (SS PWs or MS PWs) do not use the LDP for PW setup and signaling; rather, they are provisioned by network management systems or other means at each T PE and S PE along their paths.
They also do not use the LDP for status signaling.
Rather, they use procedures defined in RFC 6478
[RFC6478] for status signaling via the PW Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) message using the PW Associated Channel Header (ACH).
The PW Status TLV carried via this status signaling
is itself identical to the PW Status TLV
carried via LDP based status signaling, including the identical PW Status Codes.
Sections 6 and 7 of RFC 6870 describe the management of a primary PW and its secondary PW(s) to provide resiliency to the failure of the primary PW.
They use status codes transmitted between endpoint T PEs using the PW Status TLV transmitted by LDP.
For this management to apply to statically provisioned PWs, the PW status signaling defined in RFC 6478 MUST be used for the primary and secondary PWs.
In that case, the endpoint T PEs can then use the PW status signaling provided by RFC 6478 in place of LDP based status signaling, so that the status signaling based procedures in RFC 6870 operate identically to when used with LDP based status signaling.
Note that the optional S PE Bypass Mode defined in Section 5.5 of RFC 6478 cannot be used, as it requires LDP signaling.
Operational Considerations Because LDP is not used between the T PEs for statically provisioned MS PWs, the negotiation procedures described in RFC 6870 cannot be used.
Thus, operational care must be taken so that the endpoint T PEs are identically provisioned regarding the use of this document, specifically whether or not MS PW redundancy is being used, and for each protected MS PW, the identity of the primary MS PW and the precedence of the secondary MS PWs.
The security considerations defined for RFC 6478 apply to this document as well.
As the security considerations in RFCs 6718 and 6870 are related to their use of LDP, they are not required for this document.
If the alternative approach in Appendix A is used, then the security considerations defined for RFCs 6378, 7271, and 7324 also apply.
Appendix A.  Optional Linear Protection Approach A.1.
In "MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP)
Linear Protection" [RFC6378], as well as in the later updates of that RFC "MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP)
Linear Protection to Match the Operational Expectations of Synchronous Digital Hierarchy, Optical Transport Network, and Ethernet Transport Network Operators"
[RFC7271] and "Updates to MPLS
Transport Profile Linear Protection" [RFC7324], the Protection State Coordination (PSC) protocol was defined for MPLS LSPs only.
This appendix extends these RFCs to be applicable for PWs (SS PW and MS PW) as well.
This is useful especially in the case of end to end
static provisioned MS PWs running over MPLS TP where tunnel protection alone cannot be relied upon for end to end protection of PWs against S PE failure.
It also enables a uniform operational approach for protection at LSP and PW layers and an easier management integration for networks that already implement the approach in RFCs 6378, 7271, and 7324.
The protection architectures are those defined in [RFC6378].
For the purposes of this appendix, we define the protection domain of a point to point PW as consisting of two terminating PEs (T PEs) and the transport paths that connect them (see Figure 2).
This Appendix is an OPTIONAL alternative approach to the one in Section 2.
For interoperability, all implementations MUST include the approach in Section 2, even if this alternative approach is used.
The operational considerations in Section 3 continue to apply when this approach is used, and operational care must be taken so that the endpoint T PEs are identically provisioned regarding the use of this document.
Encapsulation of the PSC Protocol for Pseudowires
The PSC protocol can be used to protect against defects on any LSP (segment, link, or path).
In the case of MS PW, the PSC protocol can also protect failed intermediate nodes (S PE).
Linear protection protects an LSP or PW end to end
and if a failure is detected, switches traffic over to another (redundant) set of resources.
Obviously, the protected entity does not need to be of the same type as the protecting entity.
For example, it is possible to protect a link by a path.
Likewise, it is possible to protect an SS PW with an MS PW, and vice versa.
From a PSC protocol point of view, it is possible to view an SS PW as a single hop LSP and an MS PW as a multiple hop LSP.
Thus, this provides end to end protection for the SS PW or MS PW.
The Generic Associated Channel (G Ach) carrying the PSC protocol information is placed in the label stack directly beneath the PW identifier.
The PSC protocol will then work as specified in RFCs 6378, 7271, and 7324.
