The "create form" and "edit form" Link Relations Abstract RFC 5988 standardized a means of indicating the relationships between resources on the Web.
This specification defines link relation types that may be used to express the relationships between a resource and an input form for constructing data submissions.
[RFC5988] standardized a means of indicating the relationships between resources on the Web.
This specification defines link relation types that may be used to express the relationships between a resource and an input form for constructing data submissions.
The "create form" and "edit form" link relations are intentionally generic, and they can be used with multiple media types in a wide variety of use cases.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
The following link relations are defined.
The "create form" Link Relation Type When included in a response, the "create form" link relation indicates a target resource that represents a form that can be used to append a new member to the link context.
> or, expressed as a Link header Link:
Using the "create form" Link Relation
If the form representation includes a submission URI, this URI MUST be used to submit the form.
The context URI SHOULD be used otherwise.
If the form representation includes a submission method, this method MUST be used for submit requests.
HTTP's POST method SHOULD be used otherwise.
The "edit form" Link Relation Type When included in a response, the "edit form" link relation indicates a target resource that represents a form that can be used for updating the context resource.
>; rel "edit form"; title "Edit Entry" 3.2.1.
Using the "edit form" Link Relation
If the form representation includes a submission URI, this URI MUST be used to submit the form.
The context URI SHOULD be used otherwise.
If the form representation includes a submission method, this method MUST be used for submit requests.
HTTP's PUT method SHOULD be used otherwise.
When submitting forms in unsupported media type format, service may respond to the client with HTTP's 415 Unsupported Media Type status code.
this form </a> to create a new entry.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the "create form" and "edit form" link relations below as per [RFC5988].
The Link Relation Registration "create form" Relation Name:
create form Description: The target IRI points to a resource where a submission form can be obtained.
Security considerations: Automated agents should take care when this relation crosses administrative domains (e.g., the URI has a different authority than the current document).
The Link Relation Registration "edit form" Relation Name:
The target IRI points to a resource where a submission form for editing the associated resource can be obtained.
Security Considerations: Automated agents should take care when this relation crosses administrative domains (e.g., the URI has a different authority than the current document).
Security Considerations See Section 7 of RFC 5988 [RFC5988].
Internationalisation Considerations See Section 8 of RFC 5988 [RFC5988].
