Abstract This specification defines the JSON merge patch format and processing rules.
The merge patch format is primarily intended for use with the HTTP PATCH method as a means of describing a set of modifications to a target resource's content.
This specification defines the JSON merge patch document format, processing rules, and associated MIME media type identifier.
The merge patch format is primarily intended for use with the HTTP PATCH method [RFC5789] as a means of describing a set of modifications to a target resource's content.
A JSON merge patch document describes changes to be made to a target JSON document using a syntax that closely mimics the document being modified.
Recipients of a merge patch document determine the exact set of changes being requested by comparing the content of the provided patch against the current content of the target document.
If the provided merge patch contains members that do not appear within the target, those members are added.
If the target does contain the member, the value is replaced.
Null values in the merge patch are given special meaning to indicate the removal of existing values in the target.
When applied to the target resource, the value of the "a" member is replaced with "z" and "f" is removed, leaving the remaining content untouched.
This design means that merge patch documents are suitable for describing modifications to JSON documents that primarily use objects for their structure and do not make use of explicit null values.
The merge patch format is not appropriate for all JSON syntaxes.
Processing Merge Patch Documents JSON merge patch documents describe, by example, a set of changes that are to be made to a target resource.
Recipients of merge patch documents are responsible for comparing the merge patch with the current content of the target resource to determine the specific set of change operations to be applied to the target.
To apply the merge patch document to a target resource, the system realizes the effect of the following function, described in pseudocode.
For this description, the function is called MergePatch, and it takes two arguments: the target resource document and the merge patch document.
The Target argument can be any JSON value or undefined.
The Patch argument can be any JSON value.
if Patch is an Object
There are a few things to note about the function.
If the patch is anything other than an object, the result will always be to replace the entire target with the entire patch.
Also, it is not possible to patch part of a target that is not an object, such as to replace just some of the values in an array.
The MergePatch operation is defined to operate at the level of data items, not at the level of textual representation.
There is no expectation that the MergePatch operation will preserve features at the textual representation level such as white space, member ordering, number precision beyond what is available in the target's implementation, and so forth.
In addition, even if the target implementation allows multiple name/value pairs with the same name, the result of the MergePatch operation on such objects is not defined.
to the value "Hello!", add a new "phoneNumber" member, remove the "familyName" member from the "author" object, and replace the "tags" array so that it doesn't include the word "sample" would send the following request: PATCH /my
This specification registers the following additional MIME media types: Type name:
application Subtype name: merge patch json Required parameters:
Resources that use the "application/ merge patch json" media type are required to conform to the "application/json" media type and are therefore subject to the same encoding considerations specified in Section 8 of [RFC7159].
Security considerations: As defined in this specification Published specification: This specification.
Applications that use this media type: None currently known.
: N/A Macintosh file type code(s): TEXT Person & email address to contact for further information:
The "application/merge patch json" media type allows user agents to indicate their intention for the server to determine the specific set of change operations to be applied to a target resource.
As such, it is the server's responsibility to determine the appropriateness of any given change as well as the user agent's authorization to request such changes.
How such determinations are made is considered out of the scope of this specification.
All of the security considerations discussed in Section 5 of [RFC5789] apply to all uses of the HTTP PATCH method with the "application/merge patch json" media type.
