Abstract This document defines an additional header field for use in Abuse Reporting Format (ARF) reports to permit the identification of the source port of the connection involved in an abuse incident.
This document updates RFC 6591.
Introduction [ARF] defined the Abuse Reporting Format, an extensible message format for Email Feedback Reports.
These reports are used to report incidents of email abuse.
ARF was extended by [AUTHFAILURE REPORT] to enable the reporting of email authentication failures.
These specifications provided for the source IP address to be included in a report.
As explained in [LOG], the deployment of IP address sharing techniques requires the source port values to be included in reports if unambiguous identification of the origin of abuse is to be achieved.
This document defines an ARF reporting field to contain this information and provides guidance for its use.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [KEYWORDS].
A new ARF header field called "Source Port" is defined.
When present in a report, it MUST contain the client port of the TCP connection from which the reported message originated, corresponding to the "Source IP" field that contains the client address of that same connection, thereby describing completely the origin of the abuse incident.
Per, [ABNF], the formal syntax is: source port
5DIGIT [CFWS] CRLF "CFWS", which represents email style comments or folding white space, is imported from [MAIL].
When any report is generated that includes the "Source IP" field (see Section 3.2 of [ARF]), this field SHOULD also be present, unless the port number is unavailable.
Use of this field is RECOMMENDED for reports generated per [AUTHFAILURE REPORT]
(see Section 3.1 of that document).
Time Accuracy [LOG] underscores the importance of accurate clocks when generating reports that include source port information because of the fact that source ports can be recycled very quickly in Internet Service Provider environments.
The same considerations described there apply here.
Report generators that include an Arrival Date report field MAY choose to express the value of that date in Universal Coordinated Time (UTC) to enable simpler correlation with local records at sites that are following the provisions of [LOG].
IANA Considerations IANA has added the following entry to the "Feedback Report Header Fields" registry: Field Name:
Source Port Description:  TCP source port from which the original message was received Multiple Appearances:  No Related "Feedback Type":  any Reference:
This extension introduces no new security considerations not already covered in [ARF].
Some security considerations related to the general topic of source port logging can be found in [LOG].
