Oct. 74 NIC #31155 Online file:
Telnet Output Carriage Return Disposition Option 1.
Command name and code NAOCRD
(Negotiate About Output Carriage Return Disposition)
In the following, we are discussing  a  simplex  connection,  as described in the NAOL and NAOP Telnet options.
The data sender requests or agrees to negotiate about    output    carriage return    character disposition with the  data  receiver.
In  the case  where  agreement  has been reached and in the absence  of  further  subnegotiations,  the data  receiver is assumed to be handling output carriage returns.
The data  sender  refuses  to  negotiate  about output
the data receiver,  or  demands  a  return  to  the unnegotiated default mode.
The  data  receiver  requests  or   agrees   to negotiate    about    output    carriage return disposition with the sender.
In the case where agreement  has  been reached and in the absence of further subnegotiations, the  data  receiver alone   is   assumed   to
be  handling  output carriage returns.
The data receiver refuses  to  negotiate  about output  carriage return disposition, or demands a return to the unnegotiated default mode.
IAC SB NAOCRD DS <8 bit value> IAC SE
The  data  sender  specifies,  with
the  8 bit IAC SB NAOCRD DR <8 bit value> IAC SE
The    data    receiver specifies,  with
the  8 bit value, which party should handle carriage returns and  what  their disposition should be.
The code for DR is 0.
In   the   default   absence    of negotiations  concerning  which party, data sender or data receiver, is handling output carriage returns, neither party  is  required  to handle
neither  party  is  prohibited  from handling them; but it is appropriate if at least the  data  receiver handles carriage returns, albeit primitively.
Motivation for the Option Please refer to section 4 of the NAOL and  of  the  NAOP  Telnet option descriptions.
Command sender  suggests  that  he  alone  will handle carriage returns, for the connection.
The    value   is   the   number   of character times to wait or number  of  NULs  to insert  in  the  data stream before sending the next  data  character.
be transmitted  (on  the other simplex connection) before sending more data.
Note  that, due to the assynchrony of the two simplex connections, phase problems can occur with this option.
The guiding rules are that: (1) if neither data receiver nor data  sender  wants  to  handle carriage returns, the data receiver must do it, and (2) if both  data  receiver  and  data  sender  want  to  handle carriage returns, the data sender gets to do it.
The reasoning for the former rule is that if neither wants to do it,  then  the default in the NAOCRD option dominates.
If both want to do it, the sender, who is  presumed  to  have  special  knowledge about  the data, should be allowed to do it, taking into account any suggestions the receiver may make.
Note that carriage return delays, controlled by the data sender,
must  consist  of  NUL  characters
inserted  immediately  after the character in question.
This is necessary due to the assynchrony  of network  transmissions.
Due  to the Telnet end of line convention, with carriage returns followed by a linefeed, any  NULs
that  would otherwise  be  placed after the carriage return must be placed after the linefeed,
regardless of any modifications that may  additionally be made to the line feed (see NAOLFD Telnet option).
As with all option negotiations, neither party should suggest  a state  already  in  effect  except  to  refuse to negotiate; changes should be acknowledged; and once refused, an option  should  not  be resuggested   until
changes"  (e.g.,  another  process starts).
