IETF consensus for Internationalized Domain Names for Applications (IDNA) derived character properties related to the three code points, existing in Unicode 5.2, that changed property values when version 6.0 was released.
The consensus is that no update is needed to RFC 5892 based on the changes made in Unicode 6.0.
[RFC5892] specifies an algorithm that was defined when version 5.0 (later updated to version 5.2)
[Unicode5.2] was the current version of Unicode, and it also defines a derived property value based on that algorithm.
Unicode 6.0 [Unicode6] has changed GeneralCategory of three code points that were allocated in Unicode 5.2 or earlier.
This implies that the derived property value differs depending on whether the property definitions used are from Unicode 5.2 or 6.0.
These are non backward compatible changes as described in Section 5.1 of RFC 5892.
The three code points are: 1.1.
The GeneralCategory for this character changes from So to Lo.
This implies that the derived property value changes from DISALLOWED to PVALID.
U 0CF2 KANNADA SIGN UPADHMANIYA The GeneralCategory for this character
changes from So to Lo.
This implies that the derived property value changes from DISALLOWED to PVALID.
NEW TAI LUE THAM DIGIT ONE
The GeneralCategory for this character changes from Nd to No.
This implies that the derived property value changes from PVALID to DISALLOWED.
No change to RFC 5892 is needed based on the changes made in Unicode 6.0.
This consensus does not imply that no changes will be made to RFC 5892 for all future updates of The Unicode Standard.
This RFC has been produced because 6.0 is the first version of Unicode to be released since IDNA2008 was published.
IANA Considerations IANA has updated the derived property value registry according to RFC 5892 and the property values defined in The Unicode Standard version 6.0. 4.
Security Considerations When the algorithm presented in RFC 5892 is applied using the property definitions of Unicode Standard version 6.0, the result will be different from when it is applied using the property definitions of Unicode 5.2 for the three code points discussed in this document.
The three code points are unlikely to occur in internationalized domain names, however, so the security implications of the changes are minor.
