Abstract GMPLS provides control for multiple switching technologies and for hierarchical switching within a technology.
GMPLS routing and signaling use common values to indicate the type of switching technology.
These values are carried in routing protocols via the Switching Capability field, and in signaling protocols via the Switching Type field.
While the values used in these fields are the primary indicators of the technology and hierarchy level being controlled, the values are not consistently defined and used across the different technologies supported by GMPLS.
This document is intended to resolve the inconsistent definition and use of the Switching Capability and Type fields by narrowly scoping the meaning and use of the fields.
This document updates all documents that use the GMPLS Switching Capability and Types fields, in particular RFCs 3471, 4202, 4203, and 5307.
Introduction Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) provides control for multiple switching technologies.
It also supports hierarchical switching within a technology.
The original GMPLS Architecture, per [RFC3945], included support for five types of switching capabilities.
An additional type was also defined in [RFC6002].
The switching types defined in these documents include: 1.
Layer 2 Switch Capable (L2SC) 3.
Time Division Multiplex Capable (TDM
Data Channel Switching Capable (DCSC) Support for the original types was defined for routing in [RFC4202], [RFC4203], and [RFC5307], where the types were represented in the Switching Capability (Switching Cap) field.
In general, hierarchy within a type is addressed in a type specific fashion, and a single Switching Capability field value is defined per type.
The exception to this is PSC, which was assigned four values to indicate four levels of hierarchy: PSC 1, PSC 2, PSC 3, and PSC 4.
The same values used in routing are defined for signaling in [RFC3471], and are carried in the Switching Type field.
Following the IANA registry, we refer to the values used in the routing Switching Capability field and signaling Switching Type field as Switching Types.
In general, a Switching Type does not indicate a specific data plane technology; this needs to be inferred from context.
For example, L2SC was defined to cover Ethernet and ATM, and TDM was defined to cover both SONET/SDH [RFC4606] and G.709 [RFC4328].
The basic assumption was that different technologies of the same type would never operate within the same control, i.e., signaling and routing domains.
The past approach in assignment of Switching Types has proven to be problematic from two perspectives.
The first issue is that some examples of switching technologies have different levels of switching that can be performed within the same technology.
For example, there are multiple types of Ethernet switching that may occur within a provider network.
The second issue is that the Switching Capability field value is used in Interior Gateway Protocols (IGPs) to indicate the format of the Switching Capability specific information (SCSI) field, and that an implicit mapping of type to SCSI format is impractical for implementations that support multiple switching technologies.
These issues led to the introduction of two new types for Ethernet in [RFC6004] and [RFC6060],
Ethernet Virtual Private Line (EVPL)
1 PBB TE (Provider Backbone Bridge Traffic Engineering)
An additional value is also envisioned to be assigned in support of G.709v3 by [GMPLS G709] in order to disambiguate the format of the SCSI field.
While a common representation of hierarchy levels within a switching technology certainly fits the design objectives of GMPLS, the definition of multiple PSC Switching Types has also proven to be of little value.
Notably, there are no known uses of PSC 2, PSC 3, and PSC 4.
This document proposes to resolve such inconsistent definitions and uses of the Switching Types by reducing the scope of the related fields and narrowing their use.
In particular, this document deprecates the use of the Switching Types as an identifier of hierarchy levels within a switching technology and limits its use to the identification of a per switching technology SCSI field format.
This document updates all documents that use the GMPLS Switching Capability and Switching Type fields, in particular RFCs 3471, 4202, 4203, and 5307.
The Switching Type values are carried in both routing and signaling protocols.
Values are identified in IANA's "Generalized Multi  Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Parameters" registry, which is currently located at <http://www.iana.org/assignments/ gmpls sig parameters/
For routing, a common information element is defined to carry Switching Type values for both OSPF and IS IS routing protocols in [RFC4202].
Per [RFC4202], Switching Type values are carried in a Switching Capability (Switching Cap) field in an Interface Switching Capability Descriptor.
This information shares a common formatting in both OSPF as defined by [RFC4203] and in IS IS as defined by [RFC5307]
The content of the Switching Capability specific information field depends on the value of the Switching Capability field.
Similarly, the Switching Type field is defined as part of a common format for use by GMPLS signaling protocols in [RFC3471] and is used by [RFC3473]:
8 bits Indicates the type of switching that should be performed on a particular link.
This field is needed for links that advertise more than one type of switching capability.
Conventions Used In This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
This document modifies the definition of Switching Type.
The definitions are slightly different for routing and signaling and are described in the following sections.
[RFC4203] [RFC5307], the following definition should be used for Switching Cap field:
The Switching Cap field indicates the type of switching being advertised via GMPLS Switching Type values.
A different Switching Type value SHOULD be used for each data plane technology, even when those technologies share the same type of multiplexing or switching.
For example, Time Division Multiplexing (TDM) technologies that have different multiplexing structures, such as Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) [G.707] and Optical Transport Network (OTN)
[G.709], should use two different Switching Types.
As the format of the Switching Capability specific information field is dependent on the value of this field, a different Switching Type value MUST be used to differentiate between different Switching Capability specific information field formats.
This definition does not modify the format of the Interface Switching Capability Descriptor.
Note that from a practical standpoint, this means that any time a new switching technology might use a different Switching Capability  specific information field format, a new Switching Type SHOULD be used.
For signaling [RFC3471], which is used by [RFC3473], the following definition should be used for the Switching Type field:
Indicates the type of switching that should be performed on a particular link via GMPLS Switching Type values.
This field maps to one of the values advertised for the corresponding link in the routing Switching Capability Descriptor, see [RFC4203] and [RFC5307].
Note that from a practical standpoint, there is no change in the definition of this field.
This document deprecates the following Switching Types:
These values SHOULD be treated as unsupported types and, in the case of signaling, processed according to Section 2.1.1 of [RFC3473].
Compatibility For existing implementations, the primary impact of this document is deprecating the use of PSC 2, 3, and 4.
At the time of publication, there are no known deployments (or even implementations) that make use of these values, so there are no compatibility issues for current routing and signaling implementations.
This document impacts the values carried in a single field in signaling and routing protocols.
As no new protocol formats or mechanisms are defined, there are no particular security implications raised by this document.
For a general discussion on MPLS  and GMPLS related security issues, see the MPLS/GMPLS security framework [RFC5920].
IANA Considerations IANA has deprecated some values and redefined the related values in the "IANA GMPLS TC MIB" definitions.
In particular, the Switching Types portion of the "Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Parameters" registry been revised to read: Switching Types Registration Procedures Standards Action Reference
Unassigned 30    Ethernet Virtual Private Line (EVPL)
Unassigned 51    Layer 2 Switch
Time Division Multiplex Capable (TDM)
Data Channel Switching Capable (DCSC)
[RFC3471] 201 255 Unassigned A parallel change to
IANA GMPLS TC MIB was also made.
In particular, under IANAGmplsSwitchingTypeTC a reference to this document has been added as item 3.
