Request for Comments Summary RFC Numbers 2500
2599 Status of This Memo
This RFC is a slightly annotated list of the 100 RFCs from RFC 2500 through RFCs 2599.
This is a status report on these RFCs.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
Note Many RFCs, but not all, are Proposed Standards, Draft Standards, or Standards.
Since the status of these RFCs may change during the standards processing, we note here only that they are on the standards track.
Please see the latest edition of "Internet Official Protocol Standards" for the current state and status of these RFCs.
In the following, RFCs on the standards track are marked [STANDARDS  TRACK].
The definition of PHBs (per hop forwarding behaviors) is a critical part of the work of the Diffserv Working Group.
This document describes a PHB called Expedited Forwarding.
This document defines a general use Differentiated Services (DS) Per
Hop Behavior (PHB) Group called Assured Forwarding (AF).
This document describes how language codes are carried in LDAP and are to be interpreted by LDAP servers.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet Community.
In particular it describes a set of objects for managing World Wide Web (WWW) services.
The Script MIB extensibility protocol (SMX) defined in this memo separates language specific runtime systems from language independent Script MIB implementations.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes a set of managed objects that allow the delegation of management scripts to distributed managers.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
This memo describes mechanisms for the transmission of IPv6 packets over Frame Relay networks.
: Extensions for Dynamic Directory Services
This document defines the requirements for dynamic directory services and specifies the format of request and response extended operations for supporting client server interoperation in a dynamic directories environment.
In this document, we discuss the issues surrounding the traversal of IP multicast traffic across a firewall, and describe possible ways in which a firewall can implement and control this traversal.
We also explain why some firewall mechanisms such as SOCKS that were designed specifically for unicast traffic, are less appropriate for multicast.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The schema defined in this document is a minimal schema to support PKIX in an LDAPv2 environment, as defined in RFC 2559.
Only PKIX specific components are specified here.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The protocol conventions Protocols: FTP and HTTP The protocol conventions described in this document satisfy some of the operational requirements of the Internet Public Key Infrastructure (PKI).
This document specifies the conventions for using the File Transfer Protocol (FTP) and the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) to obtain certificates and certificate revocation lists (CRLs) from PKI repositories.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it defines objects for monitoring and controlling HPR (High Performance Routing) network devices which have the capability to communicate in IP (Internet Protocol) networks.
This document provides guidelines for developers of the Next Hop Resolution Protocol Clients (NHC).
The intent is to define the interaction between the NHC code and the TCP/IP protocol stack of the local host operating system.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The NewReno Modification to TCP's Fast Recovery Algorithm
This document describes a specific algorithm for responding to partial acknowledgments, referred to as NewReno.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document defines TCP's four intertwined congestion control algorithms: slow start, congestion avoidance, fast retransmit, and fast recovery.
In addition, the document specifies how TCP should begin transmission after a relatively long idle period, as well as discussing various acknowledgment generation methods.
It may be useful to define the acceptable lower bounds of implementation, along with the actual level of implementation achieved.
It is the purpose of this document to define the notation used for these purposes.
It is the purpose of this document to define the initial set of textual conventions available to all MIB modules.
It is the purpose of this document, the Structure of Management Information Version 2 (SMIv2), to define that adapted subset, and to assign a set of associated administrative values.
This document provides suggestions for system administrators and those implementing FTP servers that will decrease the security problems associated with FTP.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The purpose of this document is to describe coexistence between version 3 of the Internet standard Network Management Framework, (SNMPv3), version 2 of the Internet standard Network Management Framework (SNMPv2), and the original Internet standard Network Management Framework (SNMPv1).
This document describes the View based Access Control Model for use in the SNMP architecture (RFC2571).
It defines the Elements of Procedure for controlling access to management information.
This document also includes a MIB for remotely managing the configuration parameters for the View based Access Control Model.
This document describes the User based Security Model (USM) for SNMP version 3 for use in the SNMP architecture.
It defines the Elements of Procedure for providing SNMP message level security.
This document also includes a MIB for remotely monitoring/managing the configuration parameters for this Security Model.
This memo describes five types of SNMP applications which make use of an SNMP engine.
This memo also defines MIB modules for specifying targets of management operations, for notification filtering, and for proxy fowarding.
This document describes the Message Processing and Dispatching for SNMP messages within the SNMP architecture.
It defines the procedures for dispatching potentially multiple versions of SNMP messages to the proper SNMP Message Processing Models, and for dispatching PDUs to SNMP applications.
This document also describes one Message Processing Model the SNMPv3 Message Processing Model.
An Architecture for Describing SNMP Management Frameworks
This document describes an architecture for describing SNMP Management Frameworks.
The purpose of this document is to provide an overview of the third version of the Internet standard Management Framework, termed the SNMP version 3 Framework (SNMPv3).
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document is one of a set of documents, which together describe all aspects of a new Internet Printing Protocol (IPP).
One of the purposes of this document is to compare the functionality of the two protocols.
Another purpose is to facilitate implementation of gateways between LPD and IPP.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document describes IPP from a high level view, defines a roadmap for the various documents that form the suite of IPP specifications, and gives background and rationale for the IETF working group's major decisions.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document takes a broad look at distributed printing functionality, and it enumerates real life scenarios that help to clarify the features that need to be included in a printing protocol for the Internet.
It identifies requirements for three types of users: end users, operators, and administrators.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document describes a simplified model consisting of abstract objects, their attributes, and their operations that is independent of encoding and transport.
This document also addresses security, internationalization, and directory issues.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document defines the rules for encoding IPP operations and IPP attributes into a new Internet mime media type called "application/ipp".
This document also defines the rules for transporting over HTTP a message body whose Content Type is "application/ipp".
This document defines an Experimental protocol for the Internet community.
This memo defines a standards track portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet Community.
In particular, it defines objects used for the management of applications.
This document describes a mechanism by which DHCP servers are able to tell clients that they do not have an IP address to offer, and that the client should not generate an IP address
TN3270E Response Time Collection Using
This memo defines the protocol and the Management Information Base (MIB) for performing response time data collection on TN3270 and TN3270E sessions by a TN3270E server.
This memo defines a Management Information Base (MIB) for configuring and managing TN3270E servers.
The MIB defined by this memo provides generic support for both host and gateway TN3270E server implementations.
This document specifies a protocol useful in determining the current status of a digital certificate without requiring CRLs.
Specifically, this document addresses requirements to provide access to Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) repositories for the purposes of retrieving PKI information and managing that same information.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in TCP/IP based internets.
In particular, it defines objects for managing Synchronous Optical Network/Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SONET/SDH) interfaces.
This document is a companion to the documents that define Managed Objects for the DS1/E1/DS2/E2 and DS3/E3 Interface Types.
This document a) defines the use of a MIME multipart/related structure to aggregate a text/html root resource and the subsidiary resources it references, and b) specifies a MIME content header (Content Location) that allow URIs in a multipart/related text/html root body part to reference subsidiary resources in other body parts of the same multipart/related structure.
In addition there is a growing concern over using UDP based transport protocols in environments where congestion is a possibility This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The rest of this document contains a brief recollection from the present RFC Editor Joyce K. Reynolds, followed by recollections from three pioneers: Steve Crocker who wrote RFC 1, Vint Cerf whose long range vision continues to guide us, and Jake Feinler who played a key role in the middle years of the RFC series.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document defines an SMTP service extension [ESMTP] whereby an SMTP client may indicate an authentication mechanism to the server, perform an authentication protocol exchange, and optionally negotiate a security layer for subsequent protocol interactions.
But changes are required to the sockets API to support IPv6 and this memo describes these changes.
These include a new socket address structure to carry IPv6 addresses, new address conversion functions, and some new socket options.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo documents the process used by the Roman community for the standardization of protocols and procedures.
It defines the stages in the standardization process, the requirements for moving a document between stages and the types of documents used during this process.
It also addresses the intellectual property rights and copyright issues associated with the standards process.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo amends RFC 1149, "A Standard for the Transmission of IP Datagrams on Avian Carriers", with Quality of Service information.
This is an experimental, not recommended standard.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document describes the set of Microsoft vendor specific RADIUS attributes.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes a method by which a Service Provider with an IP backbone may provide VPNs (Virtual Private Networks) for its customers.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo identifies guidelines on how 6Bone sites might operate, so that the 6Bone can remain a quality experimentation environment and to avoid pathological situations that have been encountered in the past.
It defines the 'best current practice' acceptable in the 6Bone for the configuration of both Interior Gateway Protocols and Exterior Gateway Protocols.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Use of BGP 4 Multiprotocol Extensions for IPv6 Inter Domain Routing BGP 4 Multiprotocol Extensions (BGP MP) defines the format of two BGP attributes (MP REACH NLRI and MP UNREACH NLRI) that can be used to announce and withdraw the announcement of reachability information.
This document defines how compliant systems should make use of those attributes for the purpose of conveying IPv6 routing information.
This document is a republication of RFC 1944 correcting the values for the IP addresses which were assigned to be used as the default addresses for networking test equipment.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) is an application layer control (signaling) protocol for creating, modifying and terminating sessions with one or more participants.
This document defines a number of terms useful for the discussion of Internet Fax.
In addition, it describes the goals of the Internet Fax working group and establishes a baseline of desired functionality against which protocols for Internet Fax can be judged.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document discusses these operational aspects for keys and signatures used in connection with the KEY and SIG DNS resource records.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
A standard format is defined for representing detached DNS information.
This is anticipated to be of use for storing information retrieved from the Domain Name System (DNS), including security information, in archival contexts or contexts not connected to the Internet.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
A standard method for storing Diffie Hellman keys in the Domain Name System is described which utilizes DNS KEY resource records.
Cryptographic public key are frequently published and their authenticity demonstrated by certificates.
A CERT resource record (RR) is defined so that such certificates and related certificate revocation lists can be stored in the Domain Name System (DNS).
A standard method for storing RSA keys and and RSA/MD5 based signatures in the Domain Name System is described which utilizes DNS KEY and SIG resource records.
A standard method for storing US Government Digital Signature Algorithm keys and signatures in the Domain Name System is described which utilizes DNS KEY and SIG resource records.
This document incorporates feedback on RFC 2065 from early implementers and potential users.
This specification defines some common media features for describing image resolution, size, color, and image representation methods that are common to web browsing, printing, and facsimile applications.
A Syntax for Describing Media Feature Sets
This document introduces and describes a syntax that can be used to define feature sets which are formed from combinations and relations involving individual media features.
This document describes extensions to "Simple Mode of Facsimile Using Internet Mail", and describes additional features, including transmission of enhanced document characteristics (higher resolution, color) and confirmation of delivery and processing.
This document defines a content feature schema that is a profile of the media feature registration mechanisms for use in performing capability identification between extended Internet fax systems.
This memo describes a format for generating Message Disposition Notifications and Delivery Status Notifications which contain such information.
This memo specifies the frame format for transmission of IPv6 (IPV6) packets and the method of forming IPv6 link local addresses over IPv4 domains.
It also specifies the content of the Source/Target Link layer Address option used in the Router Solicitation, Router Advertisement, Neighbor Solicitation, and Neighbor Advertisement and Redirect messages, when those messages are transmitted on an IPv4 multicast network.
This specification contains guidance on the use of the Internet Public Key Infrastructure certificates to convey Key Exchange Algorithm (KEA) keys.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Public Key Infrastructure Certificate Policy and Certification Practices Framework
This document presents a framework to assist the writers of certificate policies or certification practice statements for certification authorities and public key infrastructures.
In particular, the framework provides a comprehensive list of topics that potentially (at the writer's discretion) need to be covered in a certificate policy definition or a certification practice statement.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo catalogs a number of known TCP implementation problems.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Neda's Efficient Mail Submission and Delivery (EMSD)
This specification narrowly focuses on submission and delivery of short mail messages with a clear emphasis on efficiency.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Extended Schemes and Attributes Photuris is a session key management protocol.
Schemes are provided to enable future implementation changes without affecting the basic protocol.
This document defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document defines the basic protocol mechanisms.
This document defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document specifies ICMP messages for indicating failures when using IP Security Protocols (AH and ESP).
This document defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
A Framework for Inter Domain Route Aggregation
This document presents a framework for inter domain route aggregation and shows an example router configuration which 'implements' this framework.
This memo provides information for the Internet community 2518
This document specifies a set of methods, headers, and content types ancillary to HTTP/1.1 for the management of resource properties, creation and management of resource collections, namespace manipulation, and resource locking (collision avoidance).
This memo discusses lessons that were learned during InterNIC Directory and Database Services' development and operation of WWWSeeker, an application that finds a web site given information about the name and location of an organization.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes how to build PPP sessions and encapsulate PPP packets over Ethernet.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes objects used for managing ATM based interfaces, devices, networks and services.
This memo describes Textual Conventions and OBJECT IDENTITIES used for managing ATM based interfaces, devices, networks and services.
Managed Objects for Controlling the Collection and Storage of Accounting Information for Connection  Oriented Networks
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes managed objects used for controlling the collection and storage of accounting information for connection oriented networks such as ATM.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
This memo defines a set of ATM specific accounting information which can be collected for connections on ATM networks.
This document describes the Certificate Request Message Format (CRMF).
Public Key Infrastructure Certificate Management Protocols
This document describes the Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) Certificate Management Protocols.
This document describes an option for negotiating the use of header compression on IP datagrams transmitted over the Point to Point Protocol.
It defines extensions to the PPP Control Protocols for IPv4 and IPv6.
This document describes a method for compressing the headers of IP/UDP/RTP datagrams to reduce overhead on low speed serial links.
This document describes how to compress multiple IP headers and TCP and UDP headers per hop over point to point links.
This document defines a registration procedure which uses the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) as a central registry for the media feature vocabulary.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
Anti Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs
This memo gives a number of implementation recommendations for SMTP, MTAs (
Mail Transfer Agents, e.g. sendmail,) to make them more capable of reducing the impact of spam.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
The Users' Security Handbook is the companion to the Site Security Handbook (SSH).
It is intended to provide users with the information they need to help keep their networks and systems secure.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memorandum describes a set of MIME types for use with the ISO Interlibrary Loan Protocol (ISO 10160/10161).
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo defines services that LSMA has found to be required, and aspects of the Internet protocols that LSMA has found to need further development in order to meet these requirements.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Routing Protocol Performance Issues and Evaluation Considerations
This memo first describes the characteristics of Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs), and their idiosyncrasies with respect to traditional, hardwired packet networks.
It then discusses the effect these differences have on the design and evaluation of network control protocols with an emphasis on routing performance evaluation considerations.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo summarizes the status of Internet protocols and specifications.
This memo does not affect the technical security of the Internet, but it does cite some security specifications.
Author's Address Alison De La Cruz University of Southern California Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
(310) 822 1511 EMail: delacruz@isi.edu
Full Copyright Statement Copyright (C)
This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works.
However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than English.
The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS
ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
Acknowledgement Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the Internet Society.
