Abstract In most RTP based multicast applications, the RTP source sends inter  related data.
Due to this interdependency, randomly joining RTP receivers usually cannot start consuming the multicast data right after they join the session.
Thus, they often experience a random acquisition delay.
An RTP receiver can use one or more different approaches to achieve rapid acquisition.
Yet, due to various factors, performance of the rapid acquisition methods usually varies.
Furthermore, in some cases, the RTP receiver can do a simple multicast join (in other cases, it is compelled to do so).
For quality reporting, monitoring, and diagnostic purposes, it is important to collect detailed information from the RTP receivers about their acquisition and presentation experiences.
This document addresses this issue by defining a new report block type, called the Multicast Acquisition (MA) report block, within the framework of RTP Control Protocol (RTCP)
Extended Reports (XRs) (RFC 3611).
This document also defines the necessary signaling of the new MA report block type in the Session Description Protocol (SDP).
The RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) is the out of band control protocol for applications that use the Real time Transport Protocol (RTP) for media transport [RFC3550].
In addition to providing minimal control functionality to RTP entities, RTCP also enables a basic level monitoring of RTP sessions via sender and receiver reports.
More statistically detailed monitoring as well as application specific monitoring are usually achieved through the RTCP Extended Reports (XRs) [RFC3611].
In most RTP based multicast applications such as the ones carrying video content, the RTP source sends inter related data.
Consequently, the RTP application may not be able to decode and present the data in an RTP packet before decoding the data in one or more earlier RTP packets and/or before acquiring some Reference Information about the content itself.
Thus, RTP receivers that are randomly joining a multicast session often experience a random acquisition delay.
In order to reduce this delay, [RFC6285] proposes an approach where an auxiliary unicast RTP session is established between a retransmission server and the joining RTP receiver.
Over this unicast RTP session, the retransmission server provides the Reference Information, which is all the information the RTP receiver needs to rapidly acquire the multicast stream.
This method is referred to as the Rapid Acquisition of Multicast RTP Sessions (RAMS).
However, depending on the variability in the Source Filtering Group Management Protocol (SFGMP) processing times, the availability of network resources for rapid acquisition, and the nature of the RTP data, not all RTP receivers can acquire the multicast stream in the same amount of time.
The performance of rapid acquisition may vary not only for different RTP receivers but also over time.
To increase the visibility of the multicast service provider in its network, to diagnose slow multicast acquisition issues, and to collect the acquisition experiences of the RTP receivers, this document defines a new report block type, which is called the Multicast Acquisition (MA) report block, within the framework of RTCP XR.
RTP receivers that use the method described in [RFC6285] may use this report every time they join a new multicast RTP session.
RTP receivers that use a different method for rapid acquisition or those that do not use any method but rather do a simple multicast join may also use this report.
This way, the multicast service provider can quantitatively compare the improvements achieved by different methods.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
This document uses the acronyms and definitions from Section 3 of [RFC6285].
Multicast Acquisition (MA) Report Block
This section defines the format of the MA report block.
The base report is payload independent.
An extension mechanism is provided where further optional payload independent and payload specific information can be included in the report as desired.
The OPTIONAL extensions that are defined in this document are primarily developed for the method presented in [RFC6285].
Other methods that provide rapid acquisition can define their own extensions to be used in the MA report block.
The packet format for the RTCP XR is defined in Section 2 of [RFC3611].
Each XR packet has a fixed length field for version, padding, reserved bits, payload type (PT), length, synchronization source (SSRC) of packet sender as well as a variable length field for report blocks.
In the XR packets, the PT field is set to XR (207).
It is better to send the MA report block after all the necessary information is collected and computed.
Partial reporting is generally not useful as it cannot give the full picture of the multicast acquisition, and it causes additional complexity in terms of report block matching and correlation.
The MA report block is only sent as a part of an RTCP compound packet, and it is sent in the primary multicast session.
The need for reliability of the MA report block is not any greater than other report blocks or types.
If desired, the report block could be repeated for redundancy purposes while respecting the RTCP scheduling algorithms.
Following the rules specified in [RFC3550], all integer fields in the base report and extensions defined below are carried in network byte order, that is, most significant byte (octet) first, also known as big endian.
Unless otherwise stated, numeric constants are in decimal (base 10).
The base report format is shown in Figure 1. 0
Base Report Format for the MA Report Block  BT (8 bits): Field that denotes the type for this block format.
The MA report block is identified by the constant 11.
MA Method (8 bits): Field that denotes the type of the MA method (e.g., simple join, RAMS, etc.).
See Section 7.3 for the values registered with IANA.
The length of this report block, including the header, in 32 bit words minus one.
SSRC of the Primary Multicast Stream (32 bits)
: Field that denotes the SSRC of the primary multicast stream.
Status (16 bits): Field that denotes the status code for the MA operation.
This document defines several status codes and registers them with IANA in Section 7.5.
If a new vendor neutral status code will be defined, it MUST be registered with IANA according to the guidelines specified in Section 7.5.
If the new status code is intended to be used privately by a vendor, there is no need for IANA management.
Section 4.2.2 defines how a vendor defines and uses private extensions to convey its messages.
To indicate use of a private extension, the RTP receiver MUST set the Status field to zero.
A private extension MUST NOT be used in an XR unless the RTP receiver knows from out of band methods that the entity that will receive and process the XR understands the private extension.
(16 bits): The RTP receiver MUST set this field to zero.
The recipient MUST ignore this field when received.
If the multicast join was successful, meaning that at least one multicast packet was received, some additional information MUST be appended to the base report as described in Section 4.2.1.
Status Code Rules for New MA Methods Different MA methods usually use different status codes, although some status codes (e.g., a code indicating that multicast join has failed) can be common among multiple MA methods.
The status code reported in the base report MUST always be within the scope of the particular MA method specified in the MA Method field.
In certain MA methods, the RTP receiver can generate a status code for its multicast acquisition attempt or can be told by another network element or RTP endpoint what the current status is via a response code.
In such cases, the RTP receiver MAY report the value of the received response code as its status code if the response code has a higher priority.
Each MA method needs to outline the rules pertaining to its response and status codes so that RTP receiver implementations can determine what to report in any given scenario.
Status Code Rules for the RAMS Method
In this section, we provide the status code rules for the RAMS method described in [RFC6285].
Section 11.6 of [RFC6285] defines several response codes.
The 1xx  and 2xx level response codes are informational and success response codes, respectively.
If the RTP receiver receives a 1xx  or 2xx  level response code, then the RTP receiver MUST use one of the 1xxx  level status codes defined in Section 7.5 of this document.
If the RTP receiver receives a 4xx  or 5xx level response code (indicating receiver side and server side errors, respectively), then the RTP receiver MUST use the response code as its status code.
In other words, the 4xx  and 5xx level response codes have a higher priority than the 1xxx level status codes.
To improve the reporting scope, it might be desirable to define new fields in the MA report block.
Such fields are to be encoded as TLV elements as described below and sketched in Figure 2:
Type: A single octet identifier that defines the type of the parameter represented in this TLV element.
A two octet field that indicates the length (in octets) of the TLV element excluding the Type and Length fields and the 8 bit Reserved field between them.
Note that this length does not include any padding that is needed for alignment.
Value: Variable size set of octets that contains the specific value for the parameter.
In the extensions, the Reserved field MUST be set to zero and ignored on reception.
If a TLV element does not fall on a 32 bit boundary, the last word MUST be padded to the boundary using further bits set to zero.
In the MA report block, the RTP receiver MUST place any vendor  neutral or private extension after the base report. 0
Structure of a TLV Element 4.2.1.
If the goal in defining new TLV elements is to extend the report block in a vendor neutral manner, they need to be registered with IANA according to the guidelines provided in Section 7.4.
This document defines several vendor neutral extensions.
First, we present the TLV elements that can be used by any RTP based multicast application.
RTP Seqnum of the First Multicast Packet (16 bits):
TLV element that specifies the RTP sequence number of the first multicast packet received for the primary multicast stream.
If the multicast join was successful, this element MUST be included.
If no multicast packet has been received, this element MUST NOT exist in the report block.
Type: 1  SFGMP Join Time (32 bits):
TLV element that denotes the greater of zero or the time difference (in ms) between the instant the SFGMP Join message was sent and the instant the first packet was received in the multicast session.
If the multicast join was successful, this element MUST be included.
If no multicast packet has been received, this element MUST NOT exist in the report block.
Type: 2  Application Request to Multicast Delta Time (32 bits): OPTIONAL TLV element that denotes the time difference (in ms) between the instant
the application became aware it would join a new multicast session and the instant
the first RTP packet was received from the primary multicast stream.
If no such packet has been received, this element MUST NOT exist in the report block.
Type: 3  Application Request to Presentation Delta Time (32 bits): OPTIONAL TLV element that denotes the time difference (in ms) between the instant
the application became aware it would join a new multicast session and the instant the media was first presented.
If the RTP receiver cannot successfully present the media, this element MUST NOT exist in the report block.
We next present the TLV elements that can be used when the RTP receiver supports and uses the RAMS method described in [RFC6285].
However, if the RTP receiver does not send a rapid acquisition request, the following TLV elements MUST NOT exist in the MA report block.
Some elements may or may not exist depending on whether or not the RTP receiver receives any packet from the unicast burst and/or the primary multicast stream.
Application Request to RAMS Request Delta Time (32 bits):
OPTIONAL TLV element that denotes the time difference (in ms) between the instant the application became aware it would request a rapid acquisition and the instant the rapid acquisition request was actually sent by the application.
Type: 11  RAMS Request to RAMS Information Delta Time (32 bits): OPTIONAL TLV element that denotes the time difference (in ms) between the instant
the rapid acquisition request was sent and the instant the first RAMS Information message was received in the unicast session.
If no such message has been received, this element MUST NOT exist in the report block.
Type: 12  RAMS Request to Burst Delta Time (32 bits): OPTIONAL TLV element that denotes the time difference (in ms) between the instant
the rapid acquisition request was sent and the instant the first burst packet was received in the unicast session.
If no burst packet has been received, this element MUST NOT exist in the report block.
Type: 13  RAMS Request to Multicast Delta Time (32 bits): OPTIONAL TLV element that denotes the time difference (in ms) between the instant
the rapid acquisition request was sent and the instant the first RTP packet was received from the primary multicast stream.
If no such packet has been received, this element MUST NOT exist in the report block.
Type: 14  RAMS Request to Burst Completion Delta Time (32 bits): OPTIONAL TLV element that denotes the time difference (in ms) between the instant
the rapid acquisition request was sent and the instant the last burst packet was received in the unicast session.
If no burst packet has been received, this element MUST NOT exist in the report block.
Type: 15  Number of Duplicate Packets (32 bits): OPTIONAL TLV element that denotes the number of duplicate packets due to receiving the same packet in both unicast and primary multicast RTP sessions.
If no RTP packet has been received from the primary multicast stream, this element MUST NOT exist.
If no burst packet has been received in the unicast session, the value of this element MUST be set to zero.
Type: 16  Size of Burst to Multicast Gap (32 bits): OPTIONAL TLV element that denotes the greater of zero or the difference between the sequence number of the first multicast packet (received from the primary multicast stream) and the sequence number of the last burst packet minus 1 (considering the wrapping of the sequence numbers).
If no burst packet has been received in the unicast session or no RTP packet has been received from the primary multicast stream, this element MUST NOT exist in the report block.
It is desirable to allow vendors to use private extensions in TLV format.
The range of [128 254] of TLV Types is reserved for private extensions.
IANA management for these extensions is unnecessary; they are the responsibility of individual vendors.
Implementations use the structure depicted in Figure 3 for private extensions.
Here, the private enterprise numbers are used from http://www.iana.org.
This will ensure the uniqueness of the private extensions and avoid any collision. 0
Structure of a Private Extension 5.
Session Description Protocol Signaling A new unilateral parameter is defined for the MA report block to be used with the Session Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566].
In the following ABNF [RFC5234], xr format is used as defined in [RFC3611].
/ multicast acq ext multicast acq ext
"multicast acq" Refer to Section 5.1 of [RFC3611] for a detailed description and the full syntax of the 'rtcp xr' attribute.
The security considerations of [RFC3611] apply in this document as well.
The information contained in MA reports could be stolen as with any other RTCP reports if proper protection mechanism(s) are not in place.
If desired, similar to other RTCP XRs, the MA reports MAY be protected by using Secure RTP (SRTP) and Secure RTP Control Protocol (SRTCP)
Malicious sniffing or otherwise obtaining MA report blocks can reveal performance characteristics of the RTP service and underlying network.
This information is mostly available to an observer with the ability to capture RTP and RTCP session traffic.
The contents and value of any private extension need to be studied when considering the necessity to secure the MA reports since application  level performance data might be present that is not otherwise available to an attacker, as with the required fields and vendor  neutral extensions.
Using the MA reports to provide feedback into the acquisition of the multicast streams can introduce possible additional security implications.
If a forged or otherwise modified MA report is received for an earlier acquisition attempt, invalid data can be used as input in later rapid acquisition attempts.
For example, incorrectly small SFGMP join times could cause the unicast burst to be too short, leading to gaps in sequence numbers in the approach discussed in [RFC6285].
Additionally, forged reports could give the appearance that rapid acquisition is performing correctly when it is in fact failing, or vice versa.
While integrity protection can be achieved in different ways, we RECOMMEND the use of SRTCP [RFC3711].
The following contact information is provided for all registrations in this document: Ali Begen abegen@cisco.com 7.1.
RTCP XR Block Type Type value 11 has been registered with IANA for the "Multicast Acquisition Report Block" in the RTCP XR Block Type Registry.
The SDP [RFC4566] parameter 'multicast acq' for the 'rtcp xr' attribute has been registered in the RTCP XR SDP Parameters Registry.
A new IANA registry for the MA methods has been created.
The registry is called the "Multicast Acquisition Method Registry".
This registry is to be managed by IANA according to the Specification Required policy of [RFC5226].
The length of the MA Method field is a single octet, allowing 256 values.
The registry is initialized with the following entries:
The MA Method values 0 and 255 are reserved for future use.
Any registration for an unassigned value needs to contain the following information:  Contact information of the one doing the registration, including at least name, address, and email.
A detailed description of how the MA method works.
Multicast Acquisition Report Block TLV Space Registry
A new IANA TLV space registry for the MA report block extensions has been created.
The registry is called the "Multicast Acquisition Report Block TLV Space Registry".
This registry is to be managed by the IANA according to the Specification Required policy of [RFC5226].
The length of the Type field in the TLV elements is a single octet, allowing 256 values.
The registry is initialized with the following entries:
The Type values 0 and 255 are reserved for future use.
The Type values between (and including) 128 and 254 are reserved for private extensions.
Any registration for an unassigned Type value needs to contain the following information:  Contact information of the one doing the registration, including at least name, address, and email.
A detailed description of what the new TLV element represents and how it is interpreted.
Multicast Acquisition Status Code Space Registry
A new IANA TLV space registry for the status codes has been created.
The registry is called the "Multicast Acquisition Status Code Space Registry".
This registry is to be managed by the IANA according to the Specification Required policy of [RFC5226].
The length of the Status field is two octets, allowing 65536 codes.
However, the status codes have been registered to allow for an easier classification.
For example, the values between (and including) 1 and 1000 are primarily used by the MA method of simple join.
The values between (and including) 1001 and 2000 are used by the MA method described in [RFC6285].
When registering new status codes for the existing MA methods or newly defined MA methods, registrants are encouraged to allocate sufficient continuous space.
Note that because of the limited space, not every MA method can be assigned 1000 different values for its status codes.
The status code 65535 is reserved for future use.
No RAMS R message has been sent
An unspecified RTP receiver internal error has occurred during RAMS
A presentation error has occurred during RAMS
Any registration for an unassigned status code needs to contain the following information:  Contact information of the one doing the registration, including at least name, address, and email.
A detailed description of what the new status code describes and how it is interpreted.
