Abstract This specification defines the "Authentication Info" and "Proxy  Authentication Info" response header fields for use in Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) authentication schemes that need to return information once the client's authentication credentials have been accepted.
This specification defines the "Authentication Info" and "Proxy  Authentication Info" response header fields for use in HTTP authentication schemes ([RFC7235])
that need to return information once the client's authentication credentials have been accepted.
Both were previously defined in Section 3 of [RFC2617], defining the HTTP "Digest" authentication scheme.
This document generalizes the description for use not only in "Digest" ([RFC7616]), but also in other future schemes that might have the same requirements for carrying additional information during authentication.
The ABNF production for "auth param" is defined in Section 2.1 of [RFC7235].
The Authentication Info Response Header Field HTTP authentication schemes can use the Authentication Info response header field to communicate information after the client's authentication credentials have been accepted.
This information can include a finalization message from the server (e.g., it can contain the server authentication).
The field value is a list of parameters (name/value pairs), using the "auth param" syntax defined in Section 2.1 of [RFC7235].
This specification only describes the generic format; authentication schemes using Authentication Info will define the individual parameters.
The "Digest" Authentication Scheme, for instance, defines multiple parameters in Section 3.5 of [RFC7616].
#auth param The Authentication Info header field can be used in any HTTP response, independently of request method and status code.
Its semantics are defined by the authentication scheme indicated by the Authorization header field ([RFC7235], Section 4.2) of the corresponding request.
A proxy forwarding a response is not allowed to modify the field value in any way.
Authentication Info can be used inside trailers ([RFC7230], Section 4.1.2) when the authentication scheme explicitly allows this.
Parameter Value Format Parameter values can be expressed either as "token" or as "quoted  string"
Authentication scheme definitions need to allow both notations, both for senders and recipients.
This allows recipients to use generic parsing components, independent of the authentication scheme in use.
For backwards compatibility, authentication scheme definitions can restrict the format for senders to one of the two variants.
This can be important when it is known that deployed implementations will fail when encountering one of the two formats.
The Proxy Authentication Info Response Header Field
The Proxy Authentication Info response header field is equivalent to Authentication Info, except that it applies to proxy authentication ([RFC7235], Section 2) and its semantics are defined by the authentication scheme indicated by the Proxy Authorization header field ([RFC7235], Section 4.4) of the corresponding request: Proxy Authentication Info
However, unlike Authentication Info, the Proxy Authentication Info header field applies only to the next outbound client on the response chain.
This is because only the client that chose a given proxy is likely to have the credentials necessary for authentication.
However, when multiple proxies are used within the same administrative domain, such as office and regional caching proxies within a large corporate network, it is common for credentials to be generated by the user agent and passed through the hierarchy until consumed.
Hence, in such a configuration, it will appear as if Proxy Authentication Info is being forwarded because each proxy will send the same field value.
Security Considerations Adding information to HTTP responses that are sent over an unencrypted channel can affect security and privacy.
The presence of the header fields alone indicates that HTTP authentication is in use.
Additional information could be exposed by the contents of the authentication scheme specific parameters; this will have to be considered in the definitions of these schemes.
IANA Considerations HTTP header fields are registered within the "Message Headers" registry located at <http://www.iana.org/assignments/ message headers>, as defined by [BCP90].
