E.164 Number Mapping, RFC 3761 [2]) is a system that transforms E.164 numbers [3] into domain names and that then uses DNS (Domain Name Service,
RFC 1034 [4]) services such as delegation through NS records and NAPTR records to look up what services are available for a specific domain name.
This document registers 'Enumservices' according to the guidelines given in RFC 3761 [2] to be used for provisioning in the services field of an NAPTR [7] resource record to indicate what class of functionality a given end point offers.
The registration is defined within the DDDS (Dynamic Delegation Discovery System [5][6][7][8][9])
hierarchy, for use with the "E2U" DDDS Application, defined in RFC 3761 [2].
The following 'Enumservices' are registered with this document: 'web' and 'ft'.
These share a common feature in
that they each indicate that the functionality of the given end points and the associated resources are primarily sources of information.
According to RFC 3761 [2], the 'Enumservice' registered must be able to function as a selection mechanism when one chooses between one NAPTR resource record and another.
This means that the registration MUST specify what is expected when that NAPTR record is used, and the URI scheme that is the outcome of use.
Therefore an 'Enumservice' acts as a hint, indicating the kind of service with which the URI constructed by using the regexp field is associated.
More than one 'Enumservice' can be included within a single NAPTR; this indicates that there is more than one service that can be achieved by using the associated URI scheme.
The common thread with this set of definitions is that they reflect the kind of service that the end user will hope to achieve with the communication by using the associated URI.
The services specified here are NOT intended to specify the protocol or even the method of connection that MUST be used to achieve each service.
Instead, we define the kind of interactive behavior that an end user will expect, leaving the end system to decide (based on policies outside the scope of this specification) how to execute the service.
The service parameters defined in RFC 3761 [2] therefore allow a 'type' and a 'subtype' to be specified.
Within this set of specifications, it is assumed that the 'type' (being the more generic term) defines the service and the 'subtype' defines the URI scheme.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [1].
The Enumservices registered in this section indicate that the resource identified by the associated URI is capable of being a source of information.
Web Service Registration with 'http:'
"web" Enumservice Type: "web" Enumservice Subtype: "http" URI Scheme: '
This Enumservice indicates that the resource identified by the associated URI scheme is capable of being a source of information.
Note that the kind of information retrieved can be manifold.
Usually, contacting a resource by an 'http:'
[11] URI provides a document.
This document can contain references that will trigger the download of many different kinds of information, such as audio, video, or executable code.
Thus, one cannot be more specific about the kind of information expected when contacting the resource.
Security Considerations: There are no specific security issues with this 'Enumservice'.
However, the general considerations of Section 5 apply.
Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny (for author contact detail, see the Authors' Addresses section)
Any other information the author deems interesting: None 3.3.
Web Service Registration with 'https:'
"web" Enumservice Type: "web" Enumservice Subtype: "https" URI Scheme: 'https:' Functional Specification:
This Enumservice indicates that the resource identified by the associated URI scheme is capable of being a source of information, which can be contacted by using TLS or the Secure Socket Layer protocol.
Note that the kind of information retrieved can be manifold.
Usually, contacting a resource by an 'https:' URI [12] provides a document.
This document can contain many different kinds of information, such as audio, video, or executable code.
Thus, one cannot be more specific about what information to expect when contacting the resource.
Security Considerations: There are no specific security issues with this 'Enumservice'.
However, the general considerations of Section 5 apply.
Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny (for author contact detail, see the Authors' Addresses section)
Any other information the author deems interesting: None 4.
FT Service Registration Enumservice Name: "ft" Enumservice Type: "ft" Enumservice Subtype: "ftp" URI Scheme: 'ftp:' Functional Specification:
This Enumservice indicates that the resource identified by the associated URI scheme is a service usable in the manner specified for ftp: in RFC 1738 [10], for instance, file retrieval.
Security Considerations: There are no specific security issues with this 'Enumservice'.
However, the general considerations of Section 5 apply.
Rudolf Brandner, Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny (for author contact detail, see the Authors' Addresses section)
Any other information the author deems interesting: None 5.
Security Considerations As used by ENUM, DNS is a global, distributed database.
Thus any information stored there is visible to anyone anonymously.
Although this is not qualitatively different from publication in a telephone directory, it does expose the data subject to having "their" information collected automatically without any indication that this has been done, or by whom.
Data harvesting by third parties is often used to generate lists of targets for unrequested information; in short, it is used to address "spam".
Anyone who uses a Web archived mailing list is aware that the volume of "spam" email they receive increases when they post to the mailing list; publication of a telephone number in ENUM is no different and may be used to send "junk faxes" or "junk SMS", for example.
Many mailing list users have more than one email address and use "sacrificial" email accounts when they post to these lists to help filter out unrequested emails.
This is not so easy with published telephone numbers; the PSTN E.164 number assignment process is much more involved, and usually a single E.164 number (or a fixed range of numbers) is associated with each PSTN access.
Thus, providing a "sacrificial" phone number in any publication is not possible.
Due to the implications of publishing data on a globally accessible database, as a principle the data subject MUST give explicit informed consent when data is published in ENUM.
In addition, the data subject should be made aware that, due to storage of such data during harvesting by third parties, removal of the data from publication will not remove any copies that have been taken; in effect, any publication may be permanent.
However, regulations in many regions will require that the data subject can at any time request that the data is removed from publication, and that consent for its publication is explicitly confirmed at regular intervals.
The user SHOULD be asked to confirm opening a web page or starting an ftp session (particularly if the ftp client is configured to send the user's email address as an "anonymous" user password).
Using a web:http or ft:
ftp service is not secure, so the user should apply the same caution when entering personal data as they would do if using a client application started with any other method.
Although this is not a feature of ENUM or these Enumservices, the ENUM using application on the end system may appear different from the user's "normal" browser, so the user SHOULD receive an indication of whether their communication is secured.
As evaluating a web page can involve execution of embedded (or linked) content that may include executable code, evaluating
a web URL involves risks.
If automatic evaluation of a web link were to be used, the querying user would be exposed to risks associated with that automatic download and execution of content.
Thus, the client MUST ask the querying user for confirmation before evaluating the web URL; the client MUST NOT download and evaluate the web content automatically.
An analysis of threats specific to the dependence of ENUM on the DNS, (threats against which are covered in [14]) and the applicability of DNSSEC [13] to these, is provided in RFC 3761 [2].
The IANA has registered Enumservice 'web' and 'ft' per the registration process defined in the ENUM specification [2].
