Abstract A network may contain links with variable discrete bandwidth, e.g., microwave and copper.
The bandwidth of such links may change discretely in response to a changing external environment.
The word "availability" is typically used to describe such links during network planning.
This document defines a new type of Generalized Switching Capability Specific Information (SCSI) TLV to extend the Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) routing protocol.
The extension can be used for route computation in a network that contains links with variable discrete bandwidth.
Note that this document only covers the mechanisms by which the availability information is distributed.
The mechanisms by which availability information of a link is determined and the use of the distributed information for route computation are outside the scope of this document.
It is intended that technology specific documents will reference this document to describe specific uses.
Some data plane technologies, e.g., microwave and copper, allow seamless changes of maximum physical bandwidth through a set of known discrete values.
The parameter "availability", as described in [G.827], [F.1703], and [P.530], is often used to describe the link capacity.
The availability is a time scale, representing a proportion of the operating time that the requested bandwidth is ensured.
To set up a Label Switched Path (LSP) across these links, availability information is required by the nodes to verify the bandwidth before making a bandwidth reservation.
Assigning different availability classes over such links provides for more efficient planning of link capacity to support different types of services.
The link availability information will be determined by the operator and is statically configured.
It will usually be determined from the availability requirements of the services expected to be carried on the LSP.
For example, voice service usually needs "five nines" availability, while non real time services may adequately perform at four or three nines availability.
For the route computation, both the availability information and the bandwidth resource information are needed.
Since different service types may need different availability guarantees, multiple <availability, bandwidth> pairs may be required to be associated with a link.
In this document, a new type of Generalized SCSI TLV, the Availability SCSI TLV, is defined.
It is intended that technology  specific documents will reference this document to describe specific uses.
The signaling extension to support links with variable discrete bandwidth is defined in [RSVP TE Availability].
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
A node that has link(s) with variable discrete bandwidth attached should include an <availability, bandwidth> information list in its OSPF TE LSA messages.
The list provides the mapping between the link nominal bandwidth and its availability level.
This information is used for path calculation by the node(s).
The setup of an LSP requires this information to be flooded in the network and used by the nodes or the PCE for the path computation.
In this document, a new type of Generalized SCSI TLV, the Availability SCSI TLV, is defined.
The computed path can then be provisioned via the signaling protocol [RSVP TE Availability].
The mechanisms described in this document only distribute availability information.
The methods for measuring the information or using the information for route computation are outside the scope of this document.
TE Metric Extension to OSPF TE 4.1.
The Generalized SCSI is defined in [RFC8258].
This document defines a new type of Generalized SCSI TLV called the Availability SCSI TLV.
The Availability SCSI TLV can be included one or more times.
It has the following format:
Type: 0x000A, 16 bits Length: 2 octets (16 bits)
32 bits This field is a binary32 format floating point number as defined by [IEEE754 2008].
The bytes are transmitted in network order; that is, the byte containing the sign bit is transmitted first.
This field describes the decimal value of the availability guarantee of the Switching Capability in the Interface Switching Capability Descriptor
The value MUST be less than 1.
The Availability level field is usually expressed as the value 0.99/0.999/0.9999/0.99999.
LSP Bandwidth at Availability level n: 32 bits This field is a 32 bit IEEE floating point number as defined by [IEEE754 2008].
The bytes are transmitted in network order; that is, the byte containing the sign bit is transmitted first.
This field describes the LSP bandwidth for the availability level represented in the Availability level field.
The units are bytes per second.
The ISCD allows routing protocols such as OSPF to carry technology  specific information in the "Switching Capability specific information" field; see [RFC4203].
A node advertising an interface with a Switching Capability that supports variable discrete bandwidth attached SHOULD contain one or more Availability SCSI TLVs in its OSPF TE LSA messages.
Each Availability SCSI TLV provides information about how much bandwidth a link can support for a specified availability.
This information may be used for path calculation by the node(s).
The Availability SCSI TLV MUST NOT be sent in ISCDs with Switching Capability field values that have not been defined to support the Availability SCSI TLV.
Non supporting nodes would see such an ISCD/LSA as malformed.
The absence of the Availability SCSI TLV in an ISCD containing Switching Capability field values that have been defined to support the Availability SCSI
TLV SHALL be interpreted as representing the fixed bandwidth link with the highest availability value.
Only one Availability SCSI TLV for the specific availability level SHOULD be sent.
If multiple TLVs are present, the Availability SCSI TLV with the lowest bandwidth value SHALL be processed.
If an Availability SCSI TLV with an invalid value (e.g., larger than 1) is received, the Availability SCSI TLV will be ignored.
This document specifies the contents of Opaque LSAs in OSPFv2.
Tampering with GMPLS TE LSAs may have an effect on TE computations.
[RFC3630] suggests such mechanisms as the mechanism described in [RFC2154] to protect the transmission of this information, and those or other mechanisms should be used to secure and/or authenticate the information carried in the Opaque LSAs.
An analysis of the security of OSPF is provided in [RFC6863] and applies to the OSPF extension defined in this document.
Any new mechanisms developed to protect the transmission of information carried in Opaque LSAs will also automatically protect the extension defined in this document.
Please refer to [RFC5920] for details on security threats; defensive techniques; monitoring, detection, and reporting of security attacks; and requirements.
This document introduces a new type of Generalized SCSI TLV (Availability) that is carried in the OSPF TE LSA messages.
Technology specific documents will reference this document to describe the specific use of this Availability SCSI TLV.
IANA created a registry called the "Generalized SCSI (Switching Capability Specific Information)
The registry has been updated to include the following Availability SCSI
IANA has registered the following in the "Switching Types" registry:
RFC 8330 52  L2SC with GSCSI support    RFC 8330
