Abstract This specification defines a new WebDAV property that allows clients to quickly determine the principal corresponding to the current authenticated user.
Introduction WebDAV [RFC4918] is an extension to HTTP [RFC2616] to support improved document authoring capabilities.
The WebDAV Access Control Protocol ("WebDAV ACL")
[RFC3744] extension adds access control capabilities to WebDAV.
It introduces the concept of a "principal" resource, which is used to represent information about authenticated entities on the system.
Some clients have a need to determine which [RFC3744] principal a server is associating with the currently authenticated HTTP user.
While [RFC3744] defines a DAV:current user privilege set property for retrieving the privileges granted to that principal, there is no recommended way to identify the principal in question, which is necessary to perform other useful operations.
For example, a client may wish to determine which groups the current user is a member of, or modify a property of the principal resource associated with the current user.
The DAV:principal match REPORT provides some useful functionality, but there are common situations where the results from that query can be ambiguous.
For example, not only is an individual user principal returned, but also every group principal that the user is a member of, and there is no clear way to distinguish which is which.
This specification proposes an extension to WebDAV ACL that adds a DAV:current user principal property to resources under access control on the server.
This property provides a URL to a principal resource corresponding to the currently authenticated user.
This allows a client to "bootstrap" itself by performing additional queries on the principal resource to obtain additional information from that resource, which is the purpose of this extension.
Note that while it is possible for multiple URLs to refer to the same principal resource, or for multiple principal resources to correspond to a single principal, this specification only allows for a single http(s) URL in the DAV:current user principal property.
If a client wishes to obtain alternate URLs for the principal, it can query the principal resource for this information; it is not the purpose of this extension to provide a complete list of such URLs, but simply to provide a means to locate a resource which contains that (and other) information.
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
When XML element types in the namespace "DAV:" are referenced in this document outside of the context of an XML fragment, the string "DAV:" will be prefixed to the element type names.
Processing of XML by clients and servers MUST follow the rules defined in Section 17 of WebDAV [RFC4918].
Some of the declarations refer to XML elements defined by WebDAV [RFC4918].
current user principal Name:  current user principal
Indicates a URL for the currently authenticated user's principal resource on the server.
Value:  A single DAV:href or DAV:unauthenticated element.
This property is computed on a per request basis, and therefore is protected.
Description:  The DAV:current user principal property contains either a DAV:href or DAV:unauthenticated XML element.
The DAV:href element contains a URL to a principal resource corresponding to the currently authenticated user.
That URL MUST be one of the URLs in the DAV:principal URL or DAV:alternate URI set properties defined on the principal resource and MUST be an http(s) scheme URL.
When authentication has not been done or has failed, this property MUST contain the DAV:unauthenticated pseudo principal.
In some cases, there may be multiple principal resources corresponding to the same authenticated principal.
In that case, the server is free to choose any one of the principal resource URIs for the value of the DAV:current user principal property.
However, servers SHOULD be consistent and use the same principal resource URI for each authenticated principal.
This property is computed on a per request basis, and is thus never copied or moved.
ELEMENT current user principal (unauthenticated   href)
href value: a URL to a principal resource
> </D:current user principal> 4.
This specification does not introduce any additional security issues beyond those defined for HTTP [RFC2616], WebDAV [RFC4918], and WebDAV ACL [RFC3744].
