This memo is a report on a meeting.
No conclusions, decisions, or policy statements are documented in this note.
This memo is a report on the Gateway Special Interest Group Meeting that was held at ISI in Marina
del Rey, California on 28 and 29 February 1984.
Robert Hinden of BBNCC chaired, and Jon Postel of ISI hosted the conference.
Approximately 35 gateway designers and implementors attended.
These notes are based on the recollections of Jon Postel and Mike Muuss.
Under each topic area are Jon Postel's brief notes, and additional details from Mike Muuss.
The rest of this memo has three sections: the agenda, notes on the talks, and the attendees list.
MEETING AGENDA Tuesday, February 28 9:00
The MIT C Gateway   MIT Martin 10:00
BBN Hinden 10:30 Break 11:00
CMU Accetta 12:00 Lunch 1:30
The Wisconsin BITNET/CSNET Gateway   UWisc Solomon 2:00  LAN
Computer Gateways Inc. Buhr 2:20
April 1984 Gateway SIG Meeting Notes Wednesday, February 29
SPF routing   BBN Seamonson 9:35  Multiple Constraint Routing   SRI Shacham 10:00 FACC
Cook 10:30 Break 11:00 Metanet Gateway
SRI Denny 11:20 Address Mapping and Translation
UCL Crowcroft 11:40 Design of the FACC Multinet Gateway
SAC Gateway   SRI Su/Lewis 2:00
Gateway Congestion Control Policy NW Systems Niznik 4:00
Discussion NOTES ON THE MEETING
The MIT C Gateway   MIT Martin Postel:
A description of the gateway implemented at MIT.
The gateway was first developed by Noel Chiappa.
It is written in C. The MIT environment
has 32 internal networks which are treated as subnets of the MITNET on the Internet.
The MIT gateways then do subnet routing in their interior protocol.
The subnet routing scheme is similar to GGP.
Liza has added an EGP implementation to this gateway.
Muuss: Campus network/project Athena Dynamic routing Congestion control grad student
Campus Network and Project Athena 65 VAX 750s, 200 IBM PCs.
Now   400, 1986   3,000, 1990   10,000 Subnets:
MIT gateways: 11/03s and 11/23s 68000 on Abus 6800 on Multibus (Bridge communications)
MIT C gateway Runs under MOS, bridge OS, homegrown OS.
Exterior Gw IGP Interior Gw EGP:
I heard you Net reachability poll
IP header on EGP protocol
Dest: net number, subnet number, 0,
Autonomous system number Sequence number Tasks:
Propagate exterior and subnet routing.
Packets Ext route request, and update Routing server Default gateway
MIT Gw broadcasts initial routings when it comes up, and again on each change, net is flooded on each change several times.
Each bridge can ask for help.
Wideband net gateway from BBN will also sit on net  18, and an MIT routing server to acquire routing information.
Trick BBN Gw will be on an Ethernet, and a modified ARP will be used by the bridges to "fool" the BBN gateway into acquiring the routes.
Subnet Routing inspired by PUP and CHAOS Neighbor Bridge Net I/F Bridge address
Latest seq number Aging value Route to subnet Distance Packets Request
I'm up Route update Distance vector (256 bytes)
Direct 1  127 hop count 128 255
"Interface used for next hop" to subnet and hop count 255 Unreachable Problem
too much time and traffic needed for processing.
3 level addressing and routing strategy
Routing server Default Gw Subnet routing Small but rich subnet routing updates.
The Butterfly Gateway   BBN Hinden Postel:  A description of the butterfly hardware and a discussion of the plans for the new gateway software to be implemented on it.
The butterfly machine is a multiprocessor (MC68000's) interconnected with a funny switch.
The new software will incorporate the so called "Shortest Path First" or SPF routing algorithm.
Notes Muuss: Replacement for existing 30 PDP 11 "core" gateways.
Replace GGP Routing updates filling up Neighbor probes (
Present GGP updates only hold 70 net numbers, repacking data will increase that to approximately 100 nets, but this is just short term.
Partitioned nets  Type of service routing, access control
Large and small gateway configurations
Reduce neighbor pinging  Access/departure model  Connect gateways with point to point lines
Routing o  SPF shortest path first
Gateway based routing (opposed to network routing)
Gw ID <nets directly connected> <neighbor, distance>
Updates flooded to other gateways
Neighbors  Neighbor gateways closest to gateway  Ping
next door neighbors only  For up/
down acquisition, partition into rings.
First Gw adds Gw Gw
header Butterfly gateway Processor nodes and switch nodes
4 legged switch nodes, decision is simply UP or DOWN.
2 inputs and 2 outputs.
Memory management Unit Processor node controller 2901 bit slice PVC is the memory controller.
Butterfly 32 M bps/path Bandwith:
N 2 Butterfly will support multibus interface; 1822, HDLC, Ethernet, Ring Terminal and load device will be a personal computer Small Gw for ARPA is approximately $20K New Gw processor structure Buffer Management
/gather buffers minimum size and extensions
Buffer pool on processors with I/
O   Primary and secondary collections per device
>  guaranteed minimum service per device (implemented w/counts)
A user process was installed in Berkeley 4.2 Unix to do EGP protocol functions leaving the normal router kernel function in charge of forwarding datagrams.
The EGP user process may do system calls to update the kernel routing data.
Based on the work of Liza Martin.
EGP under 4.2 Elimination of nonrouting gateways Design Forwarding done in kernel Kernel does not send redirects EGP user process for route updates Written in C EGP based on Liza Martin's code Routing Tables
EGP Process EGP Process Table
Internal information Facilities Configuration file
Predetermined number of core gateways are EGP'd to   Only accept from trusted neighbors
for now Unix Interfaces Reuse IP socket (problem with protocol number) Listening to ICMP for redirects System calls for o   Route updates
I/F status check Performance o
60 ms/packet pair (CPU time)
Typically 1% of CPU for 1 minute polling
Protocol function going Routing updates being implemented Should be all going in April.
April 1984 Gateway SIG Meeting Notes
This was a description of the BRL dumb gateway.
More interesting was the description of the BRL complex and the inteconnections between machines.
The gateway is written in C (and derived from the MIT C Gateway) and based on a simple multiprocess operating system called LOS.
BRL history LOS design Message passing Memory Management
No copying of data, buffer size
The CMU Gateway   CMU Accetta Postel:
This was a description of the CMU dumb gateway.
Muuss: History o   "Logical Host" multiplexor (March 81)   Gateway
remote debugger and monitor   Router (Oct 83)
Modular device and protocol support
Stub IP dynamic routing Local inter network cable routing.
Written in "C" Uses low memory for buffers (maximum 32K)!
(autoboot of 3M bps Ethernet)
Auto configuration of devices Individual stack contents Round robin scheduler
Dynamic memory allocation Device driver Network interfaces Auxiliary support devices
Does IP, ICMP, UDP Splicing through of PUP and CHAOS on chaos net, uses ARP.
Configuration testing protocol (as in Ethernet Spec).
April 1984 Gateway SIG Meeting Notes IP Processing    Consistency checks
Redirects does not forward misrouted packets
If DF Set   Access list for who can pass through No GGP, no EGP, Uses known gateways
Ordinary devices and PDP 10 and PDP 20
The Wisconsin BITNET/CSNET Gateway   UWisc Solomon Postel:
This was a discussion of a mail relay between the Internet and BITNET to be installed at Wisconsin.
WISC IBM (192.5.2.24) will connect to BITNET Mail gateway, BITNET uses RFC 822 headers!
Computer Gateways Inc. Buhr Postel:
This was a description of a protocol translation device between an X.25 world and the DATAPOINT ARCNET world.
Muuss: ARCNET to X.25 Bridge ARCNET from Datapoint,
Reserve/send/wait/ack protocol RIM chip implements this
"The OSI models seem less clear than the Internet models, perhaps because they are less well developed."
Wraps the subnetwork in an enhanced subnetwork layer.
Every pair of subnetworks must be connected in this design hence a bridge not a gateway.
Bridge is a network layer RELAY.
This was a description of the UCI dumb gateway.
This one is made up of two hosts (VAX 750s) 50 miles apart.
The VAXs are connected via a 9.6 Kbs leased line.
One is interfaced to the ISI NET (an Ethernet) and the other to UCIICS net (also an Ethernet).
The VAXs run Berkeley Unix 4.1.
These VAXs run as regular hosts too.
Effective bandwidth of approximately 6000 baud over 9600 baud line.
A description of a gateway designed by Ford.
The gateway is based on a MC68000 multiprocessor and a VME bus.
An interesting question that came up during this presentation  was "What is the least information a host (or gateway) must have when it comes up, and how can it acquire the rest of what it needs to go into full operation from the environment?"
M68000 CPU with various co processors.
68000 IOPS, 1822, IOP Ethernet IOP.
1 cpu does IP, routing.
Multi cpu version of MOS Lincoln IP/ST Gateway   LL Forgie/Kantrowitz Postel:
This was a discussion of the design of the Lincoln gateways used primarily in the WBCNET for speech transmission research.
This gateway uses special I/
O interfaces to promote a high packet processing rate.
The gateway implements both the regular IP, and the ST protocol which permits resource reservations to minimize the variation in transmission delay.
These gateways can, of course, act as regular internet gateways, and have achieved very good performance in terms of datagrams per second.
Packet voice experiments, wideband SATNET.
Concentrate traffic from local nets to trunk net.
Needed enough performance to load WBSATNET.
11/44 and ACC IF11 (Z 80).
Gateway SIG Meeting Notes IP problems
No support for conference call ST o   Virtual circuit   Know capacity in advance, schedule channel
Abbreviated header 11/44 900 to 1000 pkts/sec.
average 20 talker LPC voice loop, 28 data bytes/pkt, 50% duty cycle Data handling 4 pcm voice stream loop
64K bps 184 data bytes/pkt, 100% duty cycle Dispatcher Requirements
Timely do ST  Utilize rest of circuit for IP  Performance
measurement Reservations on the SATNET: Each host makes a reservation for Nbytes of M messages every INTERVAL.
ST and IP for each distant run   MPP multipurpose packets.
12,000 lines of C code in 11/44 portion.
This was a more abstract discussion of how stub gateways could interact and acquire information about the topology of the Internet.
Muuss: Ethernet stub to Internet Inexpensive, single band  ISBC
186/51 Intel @ $3000 High performance.
using Multicast SPF routing   BBN Seamonson Postel:
This was a fine presentation of the principles of the "Shortest Path First" (SPF) routing procedures with some remarks on how it is tailored to the Internet gateway situation.
One point that was impressed on me was that when using SPF in a set of gateways (say, the core autonomous system)
the procedure will do routing to an "exit" gateway.
Somehow I had not thought about it in those terms before, but
(obviously) just as there is a source and a destination IMP in the ARPANET there will be an entrance and an exit gateway in an SPF autonomous system.
Features Metric, update procedures, path calculation, forwarding Current GGP problems
Not enough topology information in each Gw   Updates potentially very large SPF in ARPANET   Single path (not optimal)
no split of flow   Delay based, to minimize delay
Global knowledge of connection topology and delays Metric used o   Delay, delay of each packet averaged (queueing plus transmission plus propagation) arrival to arrival time.
Average delay on each trunk computed every 9.6 seconds.
Report large changes in delay, fast Update procedure o   Updates report delay to each neighbor
Update triggered by topology change, significant delay change, or 1 time/minute.
Decay of threshold to direct to send update   Sequence numbers
Flooding on all trunks sent out on all lines   Receipt of echo is acknowledgement   Retransmission
Updates are 2 n l packet growth.
When lines goes up, rather than dumping routing table,just waits one minute until all updates have been heard.
Then tree is inverted into a "go here to get to this destination."
For Internet Similar algorithm, needs special packet header to indicate "exit" gateway to get to destination network.
Update procedure Neighbor interface, neighbors, and delay to neighbor.
Next door neighbors" for minimizing traffic.
Ability to package multiple updates in one average explicit Acks.
Possible to build different trees based on type of service.
This was a clear presentation of some of the consequences of the idea of type of service routing.
The level of complexity of the routing procedure is determined to depend on how many catagories of service there are and how many selections there are in each catagory.
A few examples were discussed including the current type of service parameters of IP.
Both current and proposed ARPANET algorithms provide "best" path under single constraint (number of hops, delay).
Internet will have diverse characteristics, it would be nice to consider more than one constraint.
Determine a set of measures.
Represent each measure as a single number.
Define path measure as a function of measure of length.
If just one cost is used, then SPF (or whatever) can be used for each cost.
However, under multiple constraints there is a more difficult problem.
e.g.:  minimum delay with packet size of at least 1000 bytes.
RUMC has been shown to be in the NP complete family.
RUMC needs bigger tables, more processing and routing overhead.
Its not awful for 2 choice TOS, like in IP.
Table size is random, we have to be prepared for the worst case.
Good only for virtual circuit.
Weighted sum (VC only) works only with some probability.
TOS is needed for Internet, but the algorithms are costly.
Complexity for providing TOS IP style is not too high.
This approach considered hop count to be an inadequate metric for routing decsions in a system of different types of networks (e.g., Ethernets, ARPANETs, 2.4Kb lines).
Delay was selected as the metric to use.
There are some interesting issues in the measurement of delay for some types of networks.
Also, the design considers the use of multiple paths when they are avaiable, and routing to provide connectivty between the parts of partitioned networks.
Routing with a single constraint.
A network of gateways Access, Transport, or Dual networks.
Some networks are used as backbones between gateways only.
Routing updates Variable length Broadcast routing updates Unitary ends A Gw B Rest Routing for A is really just routing to B Neighbor Gws, nets Lots and lots of tables Metanet Gateway
This is a project to invent several new addressing features for gateways.
In particular, there is a scheme to use an option much like the source route option to do multi addressing of IP datagrams.
It seems as if the gateways that implement this option will have to know which other gateways do and don't implement it.
Also, there was discussion of a gateway to a network that is in radio silence, and how to keep TCP connections going with hosts that can't talk.
This project is also concerned about network reconstitution, security, survivability, congestion control, and supporting multimedia data (voice, bitmaps, etc.)
A gateway is being developed in ADA for a MC68000 machine (SUN), and the initial version of the gateway is to be up in May 84.
Navy internet Multimedia mail and conf.
Radio silence (EMCON) Security and Survivability.
EMCON Causes special problems for EGP and
Uses name screen to redirect mail to special one way mail catcher, who then forwards using ordinary methods.
Security and survivability Access control "capability" 32/64 bit key which changes frequently (every hour or so)
Reconstitution Partitioning, coalescing, mobile host Test and monitoring HMP Gateway target 68000 in ADA.
Telesoft compiler Address Mapping and Translation
This was a discussion of some of the issues in interconnecting networks of different types including the Internet and networks in England such as the Universe network.
The Universe network is made up of Cambridge Rings at several sites linked via a satellite channel.
ARPA SATNET NULLNET UCLNET UNIVERSE Satellite, 3 UCL rings SAM o
IP switch to several 1822 hosts   IP/universe mapper, overlays UCLNET on universe   Mask and match 128.
2nd lookup (for multihoming) 3.
: Logical address into a table of universe names.
Name lookups give addresses and routes.
IP tunnels through X.25 RFC 898
April 1984 Gateway SIG Meeting Notes
Telenet for hosts that can't use SATNET.
SAM does access control and multihoming.
Clever Multihoming gives host a second address and sends an ICMP/Redirect to force TCP connection to go through a different route, but  wind up at same place!!!
It didn't help at all.
This is a distributed multiprocessor machine using a special bus network for the interprocessor communication.
The softaware is written in C.
The gateways is in an early test phase.
RADC program Started with AUTODIN II, switched to DDN.
Small to large switching devices.
DoD uses of PDNs, and partitioned network problems.
Distributed processing architecture Parallel contention, 90M bps bus, 22 wires.
Each node has cpu, memory, optimal comm line.
Wire OR presentation of address
, contention happens each time bus becomes free, all requestors put out type of msg, pri, and address.
OR of result, and highest gwy wins, sorted by (pri, type, higher addr).
Bus was originally designed for our FAA fail soft application Z 800l w/MMU.
Not binary addressing, but unitary (base1)
One element resolved per bus transaction.
Boards may be plugged in while running.
Inherent parallelism in layered protocols.
Interface connector clues board to modem levels and date rate.
Up to 100K bps now, soon up to T1 rate.
Multiprocessor approach allows routing calculation to take place out of band from the measurement of delay and traffic, and allows use of more compute power for routing.
Mostly written in C, with some assembler.
Multiprocessor operating system, designed from scratch.
April 1984 Gateway SIG Meeting Notes SAC Gateway
This was a presentation of the design for the gateways to be used in the advanced SAC demo experiments on network partitioning and reconstitution, and communication between intermingiling mobile networks.
Much of these demonstrations will be done with packet radio units and networks.
Some of the ideas are to use a gateway centered type of addressing and double encapsulation (i.e., an extra IP header) to route datagrams.
Muuss: Network dynamics due to component mobility or failure.
(SRI) Gateway centered addressing, rather than network.
Double encapsulation:  additional IP header.
TCP uses addr as an ID, IP uses it as an ADDRESS (  route)
Need to separate these dual uses of this address field.
Incremental Routing (next hop indication)
A presentation of the EGP design.
EGP has three major aspects, neighbor acquisition, neighbor reachability, and network reachability.
The autonomous system concept was discussed.
Confine routing loops   Exchange reachability information
Provide flow control for connectivity information
Very slow update RFC 898
April 1984 Gateway SIG Meeting Notes
"Good news travels fast and bad news travels forever.
" Not for routing, but only provides reachability RFC827 initial mode, RFC888 stub protocol Neighbor acquisition protocol
2 way shake   Flow rates   Explicit acquisition/cause Neighbor reachability protocol
Parasitic information   Reachability algorithm Network reachability protocol
Indirect internal and indirect external neighbors
Distance information EGP neighbors do not need to peer with more than one CORE gateway, but you may peer with anybody you wish.
Tree structured routing constraint Rigid topology Administrative resistance to odering Lack of adaptive connectivity   Neighbor acquisition incomplete.
Loops between autonomous systems will last a long time, and are a real no no.
"Appropriate first hop" criterion Not useful for implementation Requires global information Inadequate for verification
N graph shows net connectivity T graph shows
Derived features Induces spanning tree
AS3 T graph Test:  to ensure that there are no cycles Spanning subtree Specification effort
State machine designed Remaining issues
Remove extra hop in core system
Test backdoor "GGP"   Resolve specification issues   Resolve full gateway configuration
Back door connectivity guidance can only advertise 1 path at a time.
APF rule guidancee Self organization issues
Implement and distribute for operational systems.
This was a discussion of the situation leading to the ideas presented in RFC 896, and how the policies described there improved overall performance.
First principle of congestion control: DON'T
DROP PACKETS (unless absolutely necessary)
Second principle: Hosts must behave themselves (or else)
TOPS 20 TCP from DEC 2.
VAX/UNIX 4.2 from Berkeley Third principle
: Memory won't help (beyond a certain point).
The small packet problem: Big packets are good, small are bad (big   576).
When the user writes to TCP, initiate a send only if there are NO outstanding packets on the connection.
[good for TELNET, at least]
(or if you fill a segment).
No change when Acks come back.
Assumption is that there is a pipe like buffer between the user and the TCP.
The source quench problem Rule: When a TCP gets an ICMP Source Quench, it must reduce the number of outstanding datagrams on relevant TCP connections.
When a gateway nears overload, before starting to drop packets, send a Source Quench.
Node capacity: Each node ought to have one buffer for each TCP connection, plus some for overload.
Both fixes really need to be done together, although the first one is often helpful by itself.
Side effect: FTPs start off "slowly," until the first Ack comes back
Dave Mills thinks this will increase the mean delay for medium size interactions.
This probably will not work so well for SATNET.
Problems about propagation time of links biasing the validity of this result!!
A Gateway Congestion Control Policy NW Systems Niznik Postel:
This talk was (for Postel) hard to follow.
There were a number of references to well known results in queuing theory etc, but I could not follow how they were being used.
Muuss: Replacements for IMP SPF Topological observations Nodal congestion control policy GMD control application [from German network]
RPN relational Petri net DCT dynamic congestion table NCCP performance evaluation Planned GCCP:  Gateway congestion control policy Lots of diagrams and figures.
Better throughput than SPF, but somewhat higher delay.
There was very little organized discussion during the meeting and not really very much question and answer interaction during the presentation.
There was a lot of discussion during the breaks, and at lunch time, and at the end of each day.
Some things that occured to me during the meeting that may have been triggered by something someone said (or maybe by the view out the window): Don't design a protocol where you expect to get a lot of messages from a lot of sources at the same time.
For example, don't ask all the hosts on an Ethernet to send you an ack to a broadcast packet.
Has anyone worked out in detail the routing traffic costs for the GGP vs the SPF procedures for the actual case of the Internet?
How will the fact that thinking of the routing in the core autonomous system is cast in terms of an entry and an exit gateway effect other things?
Will there be special RFC 898
April 1984 Gateway SIG Meeting Notes arrangements between the entry and exit gateway?
Will an autonomous system become a circuit switch connecting pairs of entry/exit gateways?
Is TOS routing worth the cost?
Should we allow (as a new type of ICMP message) redirects to Gateways?
Does making memory larger ever hurt?
If a gateway's memory is full of inappropriately retransmitted TCP segments would it be better if there were less memory?
Is there something reasonable to do with source quench at the TCP?
If there are links (or networks) of vastly differing delay and thruput characteristics
what impact would an IP level load splitting (say by gateways)
have on TCP connections (some of the segments of the connection go one path and others go a different path)?
Are any problems avoided (either way) by using double IP headers vs a "source route like" IP option to separate the IP level addressing and routing function from the TCP level end point naming function of the IP addresses.
What bad things could happen from the proposed IP multidestination routing option?
Gateway SIG Meeting Notes MEETING
CMU R. Buhr Canada J. Noel Chiappa MIT Paul Cook Ford
LL Steve Groff BBN Phill Gross Linkabit Kjell Hermansen NTA Robert Hinden BBN Patrick Holkenbrink FACC
AIRINC Willie Kantrowitz LL Paul Kirton
SRI Liza Martin MIT Doug Miller
MITRE Dave Mills Linkabit Mike Muuss BRL
Jose Nabielsky MITRE Ron Natalie BRL John Nagle
Carol Niznick  NW Systems Jon Postel ISI Joyce Reynolds   ISI Marshall
Rose UCI Joe Sciortino AIRINC
Linda Seamonson BBN Nachum Shacham SRI Alan Sheltzer UCLA Marvin Solomon
Su SRI Mitch Tasman BBN
