Abstract The OSI Directory uses distinguished names as the primary keys to entries in the directory.
Distinguished Names are encoded in ASN.1.
When a distinguished name is communicated between to users not using a directory protocol (e.g., in a mail message), there is a need to have a user oriented string representation of distinguished name.
This specification defines a string format for representing names, which is designed to give a clean representation of commonly used names, whilst being able to represent any distinguished name.
Why a notation is needed Many OSI Applications make use of Distinguished Names (DN) as defined in the OSI Directory, commonly known as X.500 [1].
This specification assumes familiarity with X.500, and the concept of Distinguished Name.
It is important to have a common format to be able to unambiguously represent a distinguished name.
This might be done to represent a directory name on a business card or in an email message.
There is a need for a format to support human to human communication, which must be string based (not ASN.1) and user oriented.
This notation is targeted towards a general user oriented system, and in particular to represent the names of humans.
Other syntaxes may be more appropriate for other uses of the directory.
For example, the OSF Syntax may be more appropriate for some system oriented uses.
A notation for Distinguished Name 2.1  Goals
The following goals are laid out:  To provide an unambiguous representation of a distinguished name  To be an intuitive format for the majority of names  To be fully general, and able to represent any distinguished name  To be amenable to a number of different layouts to achieve an attractive representation.
To give a clear representation of the contents of the distinguished name 2.2  Informal definition
This notation is designed to be convenient for common forms of name.
The author's directory distinguished name would be written: CN Steve Kille, O ISODE Consortium, C GB
This may be folded, perhaps to display in multi column format.
For example: CN Steve Kille, O ISODE Consortium, C GB
The separators may be mixed, but this usage is discouraged.
In running text, this would be written as <CN Christian Huitema; O INRIA; C FR
Another example, shows how different attribute types are handled:
CN James Hacker, L Basingstoke, O Widget Inc, C GB
Here is an example of a multi valued Relative Distinguished Name, where the namespace is flat within an organisation, and department is used to disambiguate certain names:
OU Sales   CN J. Smith, O Widget Inc., C US
The final examples show both methods quoting of a comma in an Organisation name:
CN L. Eagle, O "Sue, Grabbit and Runn", C GB CN L. Eagle, O Sue\, Grabbit and Runn, C GB 2.3
A formal definition can now be given.
The structure is specified in a BNF grammar in Figure 1.
This definition is in an abstract character set, and so may be written in any character set supporting the explicitly defined special characters.
The quoting mechanism is used for the following cases:
Strings with leading or trailing spaces  Strings containing consecutive spaces There is an escape mechanism from the normal user oriented form, so that this syntax may be used to print any valid distinguished name.
It is expected to be used only in pathological cases.
There are two parts to this mechanism: 1.
Attributes types are represented in a (big endian) dotted notation.
Attribute values are represented in hexadecimal (e.g.  #0A56CF).
Each pair of hex digits defines an octet, which is the ASN.1 Basic Encoding Rules value of the Attribute Value.
The keyword specification is optional in the BNF, but mandatory for this specification.
This is so that the same BNF may be used for the related specification on User Friendly Naming [5].
When this specification is followed, the attribute type keywords must always be present.
A list of valid keywords for well known attribute types used in naming is given in Table 1.
Keywords may contain spaces, but shall not have leading or trailing spaces.
This is a list of keywords which must be supported.
These are chosen because they appear in common forms of name, and can do so in a place which does not correspond to the default schema used.
A register of valid keywords is maintained by the IANA.
<name component> <spaced separator> <name> <spaced separator
<optional space> <separator> <optional space
::  digits 0 9 <string
:  0 9, a f, A F Figure 1:  BNF Grammar for Distinguished Name
Only string type attributes are considered, but other attribute syntaxes could be supported locally (e.g., by use of the syntexes defined in [3].)
It is assumed that the interface will translate from the supplied string into an appropriate Directory String encoding.
In this case, the types for attributes in the RDN must be explicit.
The name is presented/input in a little endian order (most significant component last).
When an address is written in a context where there is a need to delimit the entire address (e.g., in free text), it is recommended that the delimiters <> are used.
> is a special in the notation to facilitate this delimitation.
This section gives a few examples of distinguished names written using this notation: CN Marshall T. Rose, O Dover Beach Consulting, L Santa Clara, ST California, C US CN FTAM Service, CN Bells, OU Computer Science, O University College London, C GB CN Markus Kuhn, O University of Erlangen, C DE CN Steve Kille,
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
