Abstract This document describes the framework, messages, and procedures for the Diameter Network address and port translation Control Application.
This Diameter application allows per endpoint control of Network Address Translators and Network Address and Port Translators, which are added to networks to cope with IPv4 address space depletion.
This Diameter application allows external devices to configure and manage a Network Address Translator device   expanding the existing Diameter based Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) and policy control capabilities with a Network Address Translator and Network Address and Port Translator control component.
These external devices can be network elements in the data plane such as a Network Access Server, or can be more centralized control plane devices such as AAA servers.
This Diameter application establishes a context to commonly identify and manage endpoints on a gateway or server and a Network Address Translator and Network Address and Port Translator device.
This includes, for example, the control of the total number of Network Address Translator bindings allowed or the allocation of a specific Network Address Translator binding for a particular endpoint.
In addition, it allows Network Address Translator devices to provide information relevant to accounting purposes.
Introduction Internet service providers deploy Network Address Translators (NATs) and Network Address and Port Translators (NAPTs)
A key motivation for doing so is the depletion of available public IPv4 addresses.
This document defines a Diameter application allowing providers to control the behavior of NAT and NAPT devices that implement IPv4 to IPv4 network address and port translation
[RFC2663] as well as stateful IPv6 to IPv4 address family translation as defined in [RFC2663], [RFC6145], and [RFC6146].
The use of a Diameter application allows for simple integration into the existing Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) environment of a provider.
The Diameter Network address and port translation Control Application (DNCA) offers the following capabilities: 1.
Limits or defines the number of NAPT/NAT bindings made available to an individual endpoint.
The main motivation for restricting the number of bindings on a per endpoint basis is to protect the service of the service provider against denial of service (DoS) attacks.
If multiple endpoints share a single public IP address, these endpoints can share fate.
If one endpoint would (either intentionally, or due to misbehavior, misconfiguration, malware, etc.) be able to consume all available bindings for a given single public IP address
, service would be hampered (or might even become unavailable) for those other endpoints sharing the same public IP address.
The efficiency of a NAPT deployment depends on the maximum number of bindings an endpoint could use.
Given that the typical number of bindings an endpoint uses depends on the type of endpoint (e.g., a personal computer of a broadband user is expected to use a higher number of bindings than a simple mobile phone) and a NAPT device is often shared by different types of endpoints, it is desirable to actively manage the maximum number of bindings.
This requirement is specified in REQ 3 of [CGN REQS].
Supports the allocation of specific NAPT/NAT bindings.
The internal and external IP addresses as well as the port pair are specified within the request.
Some deployment cases, such as access to a web server within a user's home network with IP address and port, benefit from statically configured bindings.
Allocation of an external IP address for a given internal IP address:
The allocated external IP address is reported back to the requester.
In some deployment scenarios, the application requires immediate knowledge of the allocated binding for a given internal IP address but does not control the allocation of the external IP address; for example, SIP proxy server deployments.
3.  Defines the external address pool(s) to be used for allocating an external IP address: External address pools can be either pre
assigned at the NAPT/NAT device or specified within a request.
If pre assigned address pools are used, a request needs to include a reference to identify the pool.
Otherwise, the request contains a description of the IP address pool(s) to be used, for example, a list of IP subnets.
Such external address pools can be used to select the external IP address in NAPT/NAT bindings for multiple subscribers.
Generates reports and accounting records:
Reports established bindings for a particular endpoint.
The collected information is used by accounting systems for statistical purposes.
Queries and retrieves details about bindings on demand: This feature complements the previously mentioned accounting functionality (see item 4).
This feature can be used by an entity to find NAT bindings belonging to one or multiple endpoints on the NAT device.
The entity is not required to create a DNCA control session to perform the query but would, obviously, still need to create a Diameter session complying to the security requirements.
Identifies a subscriber or endpoint on multiple network devices (NAT/NAPT device, the AAA server, or the Network Access Server (NAS))
: Endpoint identification is facilitated through a Global Endpoint ID.
Endpoints are identified through a single classifier or a set of classifiers, such as IP address, Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN)
identifier, or interface identifier that uniquely identify the traffic associated with a particular global endpoint.
With the above capabilities, DNCA qualifies as a Middlebox Communications (MIDCOM)
[RFC5189] for middleboxes that perform NAT.
The MIDCOM protocol evaluation [RFC4097] evaluated Diameter as a candidate protocol for MIDCOM.
DNCA provides the extensions to the Diameter base protocol [RFC6733] following the MIDCOM protocol requirements, such as the support of NAT specific rule transport, support for oddity of mapped ports, as well as support for consecutive range port numbers.
DNCA adds to the MIDCOM protocol capabilities in that it allows the maintenance of the reference to an endpoint representing a user or subscriber in the control operation, enabling the control of the behavior of a NAT device on a per endpoint basis.
Following the requirements of different operators and deployments, different management protocols are employed.
Examples include, for example, Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) [RFC3411] and Network Configuration (NETCONF)
[RFC6241], which can both be used for device configuration.
Similarly, DNCA complements existing MIDCOM implementations, offering a MIDCOM protocol option for operators with an operational environment that is Diameter focused that desire the use of Diameter to perform per endpoint NAT control.
that in case an operator uses multiple methods and protocols to configure a NAT device, such as, for example, command line interface (CLI), SNMP, NETCONF, or Port Control Protocol (PCP), along with DNCA specified in this document, the operator MUST ensure that the configurations performed using the different methods and protocols do not conflict in order to ensure a proper operation of the NAT service.
This document is structured as follows:
Section 2 lists terminology, while Section 3 provides an introduction to DNCA and its overall deployment framework.
Sections 3.2 to 8 cover DNCA specifics, with Section 3.2 describing session management, Section 5
the use of the Diameter base protocol, Section 6 new commands, Section 8 Attribute Value Pairs (AVPs) used, and Section 9 accounting aspects.
Section 10 presents AVP occurrence tables.
IANA and security considerations are addressed in Sections 11 and 12, respectively.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Abbreviations and terminology used in this document:
Diameter Network address and port translation Control Application Endpoint:
Managed entity of the DNCA.
An endpoint represents a network element or device, associated with a subscriber, a user, or a group of users.
An endpoint is represented by a single access session on a NAS.
DNCA assumes a 1:1 relationship between an endpoint, the access session it represents, and the associated DNCA session.
Network Address and Port Translation, see also [RFC3022].
Network Address Translation (NAT and NAPT are used in this document interchangeably)
NAT binding or binding: Association of two IP address/port pairs (with one IP address typically being private and the other one public) to facilitate NAT NAT binding predefined template: A policy template or configuration that is predefined at the NAT device.
It may contain NAT bindings, IP address pools for allocating the external IP address of a NAT binding, the maximum number of allowed NAT  bindings for endpoints, etc.
NAT device: Network Address Translator or Network Address and Port Translator:
An entity performing NAT or NAPT.
Entity controlling the behavior of a NAT device.
NAT Control Answer NAT44: IPv4 to IPv4 NAPT, see
NAT64: IPv6 to IPv4 address family translation, see [RFC6145] and
[RFC6146] PPP: Point to Point Protocol
Deployment Scenario Figure 1 shows a typical network deployment for IPv4 Internet access.
A user's IPv4 host (i.e., endpoint) gains access to the Internet though a NAS, which facilitates the authentication of the endpoint and configures the endpoint's connection according to the authorization and configuration data received from the AAA server upon successful authentication.
Public IPv4 addresses are used throughout the network.
DNCA manages an endpoint that represents a network element or device or an IPv4 host, associated with a subscriber, a user or a group of users.
An endpoint is represented by a single access session on a NAS.
DNCA assumes a 1:1:1 relationship between an endpoint, the access session it represents, and the associated DNCA session.
Typical Network Deployment for Internet Access Figure 2 depicts the deployment scenario where a service provider places a NAT between the host and the public Internet.
The objective is to provide the customer with connectivity to the public IPv4 Internet.
The NAT device performs network address and port (and optionally address family
) translation, depending on whether the access network uses private IPv4 addresses or public IPv6 addresses to public IPv4 addresses.
Note that there may be more than one NAS, NAT device, or AAA entity in a deployment, although the figures only depict one entity each for clarity.
If the NAT device would be put in place without any endpoint awareness, the service offerings of the service provider could be impacted as detailed in [CGN REQS].
This includes cases like the following:
Provisioning static NAT bindings for particular endpoints  Using different public IP address pools for a different set of endpoints (for example, residential or business customers)
Reporting allocated bindings on a per endpoint basis  Integrate control of the NAT device into the already existing per  endpoint management infrastructure of the service provider
For NAT44 deployments (IPv4 host)
For NAT64 deployments (IPv6 host):
Public IPv4   Figure 2: Access Network Deployment with NAT Figure 2 shows a typical deployment for IPv4 Internet access involving a NAT device within the service provider network.
The figure describes two scenarios: one where an IPv4 host (with a private IPv4 address) accesses the IPv4 Internet, as well as one where an IPv6 host accesses the IPv4 Internet.
Diameter NAPT Control Application Overview DNCA runs between two DNCA Diameter peers.
One DNCA Diameter peer resides within the NAT device, the other DNCA Diameter peer resides within a NAT controller (discussed in Section 3.3).
DNCA allows per  endpoint control and management of NAT within the NAT device.
Based on Diameter, DNCA integrates well with the suite of Diameter applications deployed for per endpoint authentication, authorization, accounting, and policy control in service provider networks.
DNCA offers:  Request and answer commands to control the allowed number of NAT  bindings per endpoint, to request the allocation of specific bindings for an endpoint, to define the address pool to be used for an endpoint.
Per endpoint reporting of the allocated NAT bindings.
Unique identification of an endpoint on a NAT device, AAA server, and NAS to simplify correlation of accounting data streams.
DNCA allows controlling the behavior of a NAT device on a per  endpoint basis during initial session establishment and at later stages by providing an update procedure for already established sessions.
Using DNCA, per endpoint NAT binding information can be retrieved using either accounting mechanisms or an explicit session query to the NAT. 3.3.
Deployment Scenarios for DNCA DNCA can be deployed in different ways.
DNCA supports deployments with "n" NAT controllers and "m" NAT devices, with n and m equal to or greater than 1.
From a DNCA perspective, an operator should ensure that the session representing a particular endpoint is atomic.
Any deployment MUST ensure that, for any given endpoint, only a single DNCA NAT controller and is active at any point in time.
This is to ensure that NAT devices controlled by multiple NAT controllers do not receive conflicting control requests for a particular endpoint or that they would not be unclear about to which NAT controller to send accounting information.
Operational considerations MAY require an operator to use alternate control mechanisms or protocols such as SNMP or manual configuration via a CLI to apply per endpoint NAT  specific configuration, for example, static NAT bindings.
For these cases, the NAT device MUST allow the operator to configure a policy on how configuration conflicts are resolved.
Such a policy could specify, for example, that manually configured NAT bindings using the CLI
always take precedence over those configured using DNCA.
Two common deployment scenarios are outlined in Figure 3 ("Integrated Deployment") and Figure 4 ("Autonomous Deployment").
Per the note above, multiple instances of NAT controllers and NAT devices could be deployed.
The figures only show single instances for reasons of clarity.
The two shown scenarios differ in which entity fulfills the role of the NAT controller.
Within the figures, (C) denotes the network element performing the role of the NAT controller.
The integrated deployment approach hides the existence of the NAT device from external servers, such as the AAA server.
It is suited for environments where minimal changes to the existing AAA deployment are desired.
The NAS and the NAT device are Diameter peers supporting the DNCA.
The Diameter peer within the NAS, performing the role of the NAT controller, initiates and manages sessions with the NAT device, exchanges NAT specific configuration information, and handles reporting and accounting information.
The NAS receives reporting and accounting information from the NAT device.
With this information, the NAS can provide a single accounting record for the endpoint.
A system correlating the accounting information received from the NAS and NAT device would not be needed.
An example network attachment for an integrated NAT deployment can be described as follows: an endpoint connects to the network, with the NAS being the point of attachment.
After successful authentication, the NAS receives endpoint related authorization data from the AAA  server.
A portion of the authorization data applies to per endpoint configuration on the NAS itself, another portion describes authorization and configuration information for NAT control aimed at the NAT device.
The NAS initiates a DNCA session to the NAT device and sends relevant authorization and configuration information for the particular endpoint to the NAT device.
This can comprise NAT  bindings, which have to be pre established for the endpoint, or management related configuration, such as the maximum number of NAT  bindings allowed for the endpoint.
The NAT device sends its per  endpoint accounting information to the NAS, which aggregates the accounting information received from the NAT device with its local accounting information for the endpoint into a single accounting stream towards the AAA server.
For NAT44 deployments (IPv4 host)
For NAT64 deployments (IPv6 host):
Integrated Deployment Figure 3 shows examples of integrated deployments.
It illustrates two scenarios: one where an IPv4 host (with a private IPv4 address) accesses the IPv4 Internet and another where an IPv6 host accesses the IPv4 Internet.
The autonomous deployment approach decouples endpoint management on the NAS and NAT device.
In the autonomous deployment approach, the AAA system and the NAT device are the Diameter peers running the DNCA.
The AAA system also serves as NAT controller.
It manages the connection to the NAT device, controls the per endpoint configuration, and receives accounting and reporting information from the NAT device.
Different from the integrated deployment scenario, the autonomous deployment scenario does not "hide" the existence of the NAT device from the AAA infrastructure.
Here, two accounting streams are received by the AAA server for one particular endpoint: one from the NAS and one from the NAT device.
For NAT64 deployments (IPv6 host):
Autonomous Deployment Figure 4 shows examples of autonomous deployments.
It illustrates two scenarios: one where an IPv4 host (with a private IPv4 address) accesses the IPv4 Internet and another where an IPv6 host accesses the IPv4 Internet.
DNCA Session Establishment and Management Note that from this section on, there are references to some of the commands and AVPs defined for DNCA.
Please refer to Sections 6 and 8 for details.
DNCA runs between a Diameter peer residing in a NAT controller and a Diameter peer residing in a NAT device.
Note that, per what was already mentioned above, each DNCA session between Diameter peers in a NAT controller and a NAT device represents a single endpoint, with an endpoint being either a network element, a device, or an IPv4 host associated with a subscriber, a user, or a group of users.
The Diameter peer within the NAT controller is always the control requesting entity: it initiates, updates, or terminates the sessions.
Sessions are initiated when the NAT controller learns about a new endpoint (i.e., host) that requires a NAT service.
This could be due to, for example, the entity hosting the NAT controller receiving authentication, authorization, or accounting requests for or from the endpoint.
Alternate methods that could trigger session setup include local configuration, receipt of a packet from a formerly unknown IP address, etc.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller
establishes a session with the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device to control the behavior of the NAT function within the NAT device.
During session establishment, the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller passes along configuration information to the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device.
The session configuration information comprises the maximum number of bindings allowed for the endpoint associated with this session, a set of predefined NAT  bindings to be established for this endpoint, or a description of the address pool, from which external addresses are to be allocated.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller
generates a NAT  Control Request (NCR) message to the DNCA Diameter
peer within the NAT device with
the NC Request Type AVP set to INITIAL REQUEST to initiate a Diameter NAT control session.
On receipt of an NCR, the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device sets up a new session for the endpoint associated with the endpoint classifier(s) contained in the NCR.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
notifies its DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller about successful session setup using a NAT Control Answer (NCA) message with the Result Code set to DIAMETER SUCCESS.
Figure 5 shows the initial protocol interaction between the two DNCA Diameter peers.
The initial NAT Control Request MAY contain configuration information for the session, which specifies the behavior of the NAT device for the session.
The configuration information that MAY be included, comprises:
A list of NAT bindings, which should be pre allocated for the session; for example, in case an endpoint requires a fixed external IP address/port pair for an application.
The maximum number of NAT bindings allowed for an endpoint.
A description of the external IP address pool(s) to be used for the session.
A reference to a NAT binding Predefined template on the NAT device, which is applied to the session.
Such a NAT binding Predefined template on the NAT device may contain, for example, the name of the IP address pool from which external IP addresses should be allocated, the maximum number of bindings permitted for the endpoint, etc.
In certain cases, the NAT device may not be able to perform the tasks requested within the NCR.
These include the following:  If a DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device receives an NCR from a DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT controller with the NC Request  Type AVP set to INITIAL REQUEST that identifies an already existing session, that is, the endpoint identifier matches an already existing session, the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device MUST return an NCA with the Result Code set to SESSION EXISTS and provide the Session Id of the existing session in the Duplicate Session
If a DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device receives an NCR from a DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT controller with the NC Request  Type AVP set to INITIAL REQUEST that matches more than one of the already existing sessions
, that is, the DNCA Diameter peer and endpoint identifier match already existing sessions, the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
MUST return an NCA with the Result Code set to INSUFFICIENT CLASSIFIERS.
In case a DNCA Diameter peer receives an NCA that reports Insufficient  Classifiers, it MAY choose to retry establishing a new session using additional or more specific classifiers.
If the NCR contains a NAT binding Predefined template not defined on the NAT device, the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
MUST return an NCA with the Result Code AVP set to UNKNOWN BINDING TEMPLATE NAME.
In case the NAT device is unable to establish all of the bindings requested in the NCR, the DNCA Diameter peer MUST return an NCA with the Result Code set to BINDING FAILURE.
A DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT device
MUST treat an NCR as an atomic operation; hence, none of the requested bindings will be established by the NAT device.
Either all requested actions within an NCR MUST be completed successfully or the entire request fails.
If a NAT device cannot conform to a request to set the maximum number of NAT bindings allowed for a session, the DNCA Diameter peer in the NAT device
MUST return an NCA with the Result Code AVP set to MAX BINDINGS SET FAILURE.
Such a condition can, for example, occur if the operator specified the maximum number of NAT bindings through another mechanism, which, per the operator's policy, takes precedence over DNCA.
If a NAT device does not have sufficient resources to process a request, the DNCA Diameter peer MUST return an NCA with the Result Code set to RESOURCE FAILURE.
In the case where Max NAT Bindings, NAT Control Definition, and NAT Control Binding Template are included in the NCR, and the values in Max NAT Bindings and NAT Control Definition contradict those specified in the pre provisioned template on the NAT device that NAT Control Binding Template references, Max NAT Bindings and NAT Control Definition MUST override the values specified in the template to which NAT Control Binding Template refers.
NAT controller (DNCA Diameter peer)
NAT device (DNCA Diameter peer)
Initial NAT Control Request and Session Establishment Note:
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
creates session state only if it is able to comply with the NCR.
On success, it will reply with an NCA with the Result Code set to DIAMETER SUCCESS.
Session Update A session update is performed if the NAT controller desires to change the behavior of the NAT device for an existing session.
A session update could be used, for example, to change the number of allowed bindings for a particular session or establish or remove a predefined binding.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller
generates an NCR message to the DNCA Diameter
peer within the NAT device with
the NC  Request Type AVP set to UPDATE REQUEST upon receiving a trigger signal.
If the session is updated successfully, the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
notifies the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller about the successful session update using a NAT  Control Answer (NCA) message with the Result Code set to DIAMETER SUCCESS.
Figure 6 shows the protocol interaction between the two DNCA Diameter peers.
In certain cases, the NAT device may not be able to perform the tasks requested within the NCR.
These include the following:  If a DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT device receives an NCR update or query request for a non existent session, it MUST set the Result Code in the answer to DIAMETER UNKNOWN SESSION ID.
If the NCR contains a NAT binding Predefined template not defined on the NAT device, an NCA with the Result Code AVP set to UNKNOWN BINDING TEMPLATE NAME MUST be returned.
If the NAT device cannot establish the requested binding because the maximum number of allowed bindings has been reached for the endpoint classifier, an NCA with the Result Code AVP set to MAXIMUM BINDINGS REACHED FOR ENDPOINT MUST be returned to the DNCA Diameter peer.
If the NAT device cannot establish some or all of the bindings requested in an NCR, but has not yet reached the maximum number of allowed bindings for the endpoint, an NCA with the Result Code set to BINDING FAILURE MUST be returned.
As already noted, the DNCA Diameter peer in a NAT device MUST treat an NCR as an atomic operation.
Hence, none of the requested bindings will be established by the NAT device in case of failure.
Actions requested within an NCR are either all successful or all fail.
If the NAT device cannot conform to a request to set the maximum number of bindings allowed for a session as specified by the Max  NAT Bindings, the DNCA Diameter peer in the NAT device
MUST return an NCA with the Result Code AVP set to MAX BINDINGS SET FAILURE.
If the NAT device does not have sufficient resources to process a request, an NCA with the Result Code set to RESOURCE FAILURE MUST be returned.
If an NCR changes the maximum number of NAT bindings allowed for the endpoint defined through an earlier NCR, the new value MUST override any previously defined limit on the maximum number of NAT bindings set through the DNCA.
Note that, prior to overwriting an existing value, the NAT device MUST check whether the overwrite action conforms to the locally configured policy.
Deployment dependent, an existing value could have been set by a protocol or mechanism different from DNCA and with higher priority.
In which case, the NAT device will refuse the change and
the DNCA Diameter peer in the NAT device
MUST return an NCA with the Result Code AVP set to MAX BINDINGS SET FAILURE.
It depends on the implementation of the NAT device on how the NAT device copes with a case where the new value is lower than the actual number of allocated bindings.
The NAT device SHOULD refrain from enforcing the new limit immediately (that is, actively remove bindings), but rather disallows the establishment of new bindings until the current number of bindings is lower than the newly established maximum number of allowed bindings.
If an NCR specifies a new NAT binding Predefined template on the NAT device, the NAT binding Predefined template overrides any previously defined rule for the session.
Existing NAT bindings SHOULD NOT be impacted by the change of templates.
In case Max NAT Bindings, NAT Control Definition, and NAT Control
Binding Template are included in the NCR, and the values in Max  NAT Bindings and NAT Control Definition contradict those specified in the pre provisioned template on the NAT device that NAT  Control Binding Template references, Max NAT Bindings and NAT  Control Definition MUST override the values specified in the template to which the NAT Control Binding Template refers.
Already established bindings for the session SHOULD NOT be affected in case the tasks requested within the NCR cannot be completed.
NAT controller (DNCA Diameter peer)
NAT device (DNCA Diameter peer)
NAT Control Request for Session Update 4.3.
Session and Binding Query A session and NAT binding query MAY be used by the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller either to retrieve information on the current bindings for a particular session at the NAT device or to discover the session identifier for a particular external IP address/ port pair.
A DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller
starts a session query by sending an NCR message with
NC Request Type AVP set to QUERY REQUEST.
Figure 7 shows the protocol interaction between the DNCA Diameter peers.
Two types of query requests exist.
The first type of query request uses the Session Id as input parameter to the query.
It is to allow the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller to retrieve the current set of bindings for a specific session.
The second type of query request is used to retrieve the session identifiers, along with the associated bindings, matching a criteria.
This enables the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller to find those sessions, which utilize a specific external or internal IP address.
Request a list of currently allocated NAT bindings for a particular session
: On receiving an NCR, the NAT device SHOULD look up the session information for the Session
Id contained in the NCR and report all currently active NAT bindings for the session using an NCA message with the Result Code set to DIAMETER SUCCESS.
In this case, the NCR MUST NOT contain a NAT  Control Definition AVP.
Each NAT binding is reported in a NAT  Control Definition AVP.
In case the Session Id is unknown, the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
MUST return an NCA message with the Result Code set to DIAMETER UNKNOWN SESSION ID.
Retrieve Session Ids and bindings for internal IP address or one or multiple external IP address/port pairs: If the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller wishes to retrieve the Session  Id(s) for an internal IP address or one or multiple external IP address/port pairs, it MUST include the internal IP address as part of the Framed IP Address AVP or external IP address/port pair(s) as part of the NAT External Address AVP of the NCR.
The external IP address/port pair(s)
are known in advance by the controller via configuration, AAA interactions, or other means.
The Session Id is not included in the NCR or the NCA for this type of a query.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
SHOULD report the NAT bindings and associated Session Ids corresponding to the internal IP address or external IP address/ port pairs in an NCA message using one or multiple instances of the NAT Control Definition AVP.
The Result Code is set to DIAMETER SUCCESS.
In case an external IP address/port pair has no associated existing NAT binding, the NAT Control Definition AVP contained in the reply
just contains the NAT External Address AVP.
NAT controller (DNCA Diameter peer)
NAT device (DNCA Diameter peer)
Session Termination Similar to session initiation, session tear down
the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller.
The DNCA Diameter peer sends a Session Termination Request (STR) message to its peer within the NAT device upon receiving a trigger signal.
The source of the trigger signal is outside the scope of this document.
As part of STR message processing, the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device MAY send an accounting stop record reporting all bindings.
All the NAT bindings belonging to the session MUST be removed, and the session state MUST be cleaned up.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
MUST notify its DNCA Diameter peer in the NAT controller about successful session termination using a Session Termination  Answer (STA) message with Result Code set to DIAMETER SUCCESS.
Figure 8 shows the protocol interaction between the two DNCA Diameter peers.
If a DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT device receives an STR and fails to find a matching session, the DNCA Diameter peer MUST return an STA with the Result Code set to DIAMETER UNKNOWN SESSION ID.
NAT controller (DNCA Diameter peer)
NAT device (DNCA Diameter peer)
Terminate NAT Control Session 4.5.
An Abort Session Request (ASR) message is sent from the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device to the DNCA Diameter
peer within the NAT controller when it is unable to maintain a session due to resource limitations.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller
MUST acknowledge a successful session abort using an Abort Session Answer (ASA) message with the Result Code set to DIAMETER SUCCESS.
Figure 9 shows the protocol interaction between the DNCA Diameter peers.
The DNCA Diameter peers will start a session termination procedure as described in Section 4.4 following an ASA with the Result Code set to DIAMETER SUCCESS.
If the DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT controller receives an ASR but fails to find a matching session, it MUST return an ASA with the Result Code set to DIAMETER UNKNOWN SESSION ID.
If the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller is unable to comply with the ASR for any other reason, an ASA with the Result Code set to DIAMETER UNABLE TO COMPLY MUST be returned.
NAT controller (DNCA Diameter peer)
NAT device (DNCA Diameter peer)
Failure Cases of the DNCA Diameter Peers
This document does not specify the behavior in case the NAT device and NAT controller, or their respective DNCA Diameter peers, are out of sync or lose state.
This could happen, for example, if one of the entities restarts, in case of a (temporary) loss of network connectivity, etc.
Example failure cases include the following:  NAT controller and the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller lose state (e.g., due to a restart).
MAY receive an NCR with the NC Request Type AVP set to INITIAL REQUEST that matches an existing session of the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
MUST return a Result Code that contains a Duplicate Session
Id of the existing session.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller
MAY send an explicit Session Termination Request (STR) for the older session, which was lost.
a DNCA Diameter peer MAY receive accounting records for a session that does not exist.
The DNCA Diameter peer sends an accounting answer with the Result Code set to DIAMETER UNKNOWN SESSION ID in response.
On receiving the response, the DNCA Diameter peer SHOULD clear the session and remove associated session state.
The NAT device and the DNCA Diameter peer within NAT device
In such a case, the DNCA Diameter peer MAY receive an NCR with the NC Request Type AVP set to UPDATE REQUEST for a non  existent session.
The DNCA Diameter peer MUST return an NCA with the Result Code set to DIAMETER UNKNOWN SESSION ID.
When a DNCA application within a NAT controller receives this NCA with the Result Code set to DIAMETER UNKNOWN SESSION ID, it MAY try to re  establish DNCA session or disconnect corresponding access session.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller
is unreachable, for example, it is detected by Diameter device watchdog messages (as defined in Section 5.5 of [RFC6733]) or accounting requests from the DNCA Diameter peer fail to get a response, NAT bindings and NAT device state pertaining to that session MUST be cleaned up after a grace period that is configurable on the NAT device.
The grace period can be configured as zero or higher, depending on operator preference.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device is unreachable or down and the NCR fails to get a response.
Handling of this case depends on the actual service offering of the service provider.
The service provider could, for example, choose to stop offering connectivity service.
A discussion of the mechanisms used for a NAT device to clean up state in case the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device crashes is outside the scope of this document.
Implementers of NAT devices could choose from a variety of options such as coupling the state (e.g., NAT bindings) to timers that require periodic refresh, or time out otherwise, operating system watchdogs for applications, etc.
Use of the Diameter Base Protocol
The Diameter base protocol [RFC6733] applies with the clarifications listed in the present specification.
For secure transport of Diameter messages, the recommendations in [RFC6733] apply.
DNCA Diameter peers SHOULD verify their identity during the Capabilities Exchange Request procedure.
A DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
SHOULD verify that a DNCA Diameter peer that issues an NCR command is allowed to do so based on:
The identity of the DNCA Diameter peer  The type of NCR Command
The content of the NCR Command
Any combination of the above 5.2.
Accounting Functionality Accounting functionality (the accounting session state machine, related Command Codes and AVPs) is defined in Section 9.
Each DNCA session MUST have a globally unique Session Id, as defined in [RFC6733], which MUST NOT be changed during the lifetime of the DNCA session.
The Diameter Session Id serves as the global endpoint identifier.
The DNCA Diameter peers maintain state associated with the Session Id.
Id is used for updating, accounting, and terminating the session.
A DNCA session MUST NOT have more than one outstanding request at any given time.
A DNCA Diameter peer sends an Abort Session Request as defined in [RFC6733] if it is unable to maintain sessions due to resource limitation.
It is assumed that the DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT controller
knows the DiameterIdentity of the Diameter peer within a NAT device for a given endpoint.
Both the Destination Realm and Destination  Host AVPs are present in the request from a DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT controller to a DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT device.
Advertising Application Support Diameter nodes conforming to this specification MUST advertise support for DNCA by including the value of 12 in the Auth  Application
Id of the Capabilities Exchange Request and Capabilities
The following commands are used to establish, maintain, and query NAT bindings.
The NAT Control Request (NCR) command, indicated by the command field set to 330 and
the 'R' bit set in the Command Flags field, is sent from the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller to the DNCA Diameter
peer within the NAT device in order to install NAT bindings.
Id, Physical Access ID, Framed IP Address, Framed IPv6 Prefix, Framed Interface
Id, EGRESS VLANID, NAS Port ID, Address Realm, and Calling Station ID AVPs serve as identifiers for the endpoint.
[ Origin State Id ]
[ Logical Access Id ]
[ Framed IPv6 Prefix ]
[ Framed Interface Id ]
The NAT Control Answer (NCA) command, indicated by the Command Code field set to 330 and the 'R' bit cleared in the Command Flags field, is sent by the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device in response to the NAT Control Request command.
[ NC Request Type ]
[ Origin State Id ]
[ Redirect Host] [ Redirect Host Usage ]
[ Redirect Max Cache Time ]
NAT Control Application Session State Machine
This section contains a set of finite state machines, representing the life cycle of a DNCA session, which MUST be observed by all implementations of the DNCA Diameter application.
The DNCA Diameter peers are stateful and the state machine maintained is similar to the stateful client and
server authorization state machine described in [RFC6733].
When a session is moved to the Idle state, any resources that were allocated for the particular session must be released.
Any event not listed in the state machines MUST be considered an error condition, and an answer, if applicable, MUST be returned to the originator of the message.
In the state table, the event "Failure to send NCR" means that the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller is unable to send the NCR command to the desired destination.
This could be due to the peer being down or due to the peer sending back the transient failure or temporary protocol error notification DIAMETER
DETECTED in the Result Code AVP of an NCA.
In the state table, "FAILED NCA" means that the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device was not able to honor the corresponding NCR.
This can happen due to any transient or permanent error at the NAT device or
its associated DNCA Diameter peer within indicated by the following error Result Code values: RESOURCE FAILURE, UNKNOWN BINDING TEMPLATE NAME, MAX BINDINGS SET FAILURE, BINDING FAILURE,
MAXIMUM BINDINGS REACHED FOR ENDPOINT, SESSION EXISTS, INSUFFICIENT CLASSIFIERS.
The following state machine is observed by a DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT controller.
The state machine description uses the term "access session" to describe the connectivity service offered to the endpoint or host.
"Access session" should not be confused with the Diameter session.
Discon received, but peer unable to provide service
successful    Send STR    Discon NCA
The following state machine is observed by a DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT device.
DNCA Diameter peer within a NAT device
Idle ASA received with Result Code
The following table describes the AVPs reused from the Diameter base protocol [RFC6733]; their AVP Code values, types, and possible flag values and whether the AVP MAY be encrypted.
[RFC6733] specifies the AVP Flag rules for AVPs in Section 4.5.
The Diameter AVP rules are defined in [RFC6733], Section 4.
DIAMETER AVPs from the Diameter Base Protocol
Id AVP (AVP Code 258) is assigned by IANA to Diameter applications.
The value of the Auth Application Id for the Diameter NAT Control Application is 12.
Please refer to [RFC6733] for the definition of the Diameter AVP flag rules and the associated abbreviations used in the table.
Additional Result Code AVP Values
This section defines new values for the Result Code AVP that SHALL be supported by all Diameter implementations that conform to the present document.
No new Result Code AVP value is defined within this category.
Transient Failures Result Code AVP values that fall within the transient failures category are those used to inform a peer that the request could not be satisfied at the time that it was received.
The request may be able to be satisfied in the future.
The following new values of the Result Code AVP are defined: RESOURCE FAILURE (4014)
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
indicates that the binding could not be installed or a new session could not be created due to resource shortage.
The Result Code AVP values, which fall within the permanent failures category are used to inform the peer that the request failed and should not be attempted again.
The request may be able to be satisfied in the future.
The following new values of the Result Code AVP are defined: UNKNOWN BINDING TEMPLATE NAME (5042)
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
indicates that the binding could not be installed or a new session could not be created because the specified NAT Control Binding Template AVP, which refers to a predefined policy template in the NAT device, is unknown.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
indicates that the requested binding(s) could not be installed.
For example, Requested ports are already in use.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
indicates that it failed to conform to a request to configure the maximum number of bindings for a session.
For example, an operator defined the maximum number of bindings on the NAT device using a method or protocol that takes precedence over DNCA.
MAXIMUM BINDINGS REACHED FOR ENDPOINT (5045)
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
denies the request because the maximum number of allowed bindings has been reached for the specified endpoint classifier.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
denies a request to initialize a new session, if it already has a DNCA session that uses the same set of classifiers as indicated by the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller in the new session initialization request.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device requests to initialize a new session, if the classifiers in the request match more than one of the existing sessions on the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device.
Reused NASREQ Diameter Application AVPs
The following table describes the AVPs reused from the Diameter Network Access Server Application [RFC4005]; their AVP Code values, types, and possible flag values; and whether the AVP MAY be encrypted.
The [RFC6733] specifies the AVP Flag rules for AVPs in Section 4.5.
The Diameter AVP rules are defined in the [RFC6733], Section 4.
Reused NASREQ Diameter application AVPs.
Please refer to [RFC6733] for the definition of the Diameter AVP Flag rules and the associated abbreviations used in the table.
Reused AVPs from RFC 4675
The following table describes the AVPs reused from "RADIUS Attributes for Virtual LAN and Priority Support" [RFC4675]; their AVP Code values, types, and possible flag values; and whether the AVP MAY be encrypted.
[RFC6733] specifies the AVP Flag rules for AVPs in Section 4.5.
The Diameter AVP rules are defined in [RFC6733], Section 4.
Please refer to [RFC6733] for the definition of the Diameter AVP Flag rules and the associated abbreviations used in the table.
8.5.  Reused AVPs from Diameter QoS Application
The following table describes the AVPs reused from the "Traffic Classification and Quality of Service (QoS)
Attributes for Diameter" [RFC5777]; their AVP Code values, types, and possible flag values; and whether the AVP MAY be encrypted.
[RFC6733] specifies the AVP Flag rules for AVPs in Section 4.5.
The Diameter AVP rules are defined in [RFC6733], Section 4.
Please refer to [RFC6733] for the definition of the Diameter AVP Flag rules and the associated abbreviations used in the table.
Reused AVPs from ETSI ES 283 034, e4 Diameter Application
The following table describes the AVPs reused from the Diameter e4 Application [ETSIES283034]; their AVP Code values, types, and possible flag values; and whether the AVP MAY be encrypted.
[RFC6733] specifies the AVP Flag rules for AVPs in Section 4.5.
The Diameter AVP rules are defined in [RFC6733], Section 4.
The Vendor ID field in these AVP header will be set to ETSI (13019).
Reused AVPs from the Diameter e4 application.
Please refer to [RFC6733] for the definition of the Diameter AVP Flag rules and the associated abbreviations used in the table.
The following table describes the new Diameter AVPs defined in this document; their AVP Code values, types, and possible flag values; and whether the AVP MAY be encrypted.
[RFC6733] specifies the AVP Flag rules for AVPs in Section 4.5.
The Diameter AVP rules are defined in [RFC6733], Section 4.
MUST NOT have the 'V' bit in the AVP Flags field set.
Please refer to [RFC6733] for the definition of the Diameter AVP Flag rules and the associated abbreviations used in the table.
The NC Request Type AVP (AVP Code 595) is of type Enumerated and contains the reason for sending the NAT Control Request command.
It shall be present in all NAT Control Request messages.
The following values are defined: INITIAL REQUEST (1)
An Initial Request is to initiate a Diameter NAT control session between the DNCA Diameter peers.
An Update Request is used to update bindings previously installed on a given access session, to add new binding on a given access session, or to remove one or several binding(s) activated on a given access session.
Query Request is used to query a NAT device about the currently installed bindings for an endpoint classifier.
The NAT Control Install AVP (AVP code 596) is of type Grouped, and it is used to activate or install NAT bindings.
It also contains Max  NAT Bindings that defines the maximum number of NAT bindings allowed for an endpoint and the NAT Control Binding Template that references a predefined template on the NAT device that may contain static binding, a maximum number of bindings allowed, an IP address pool from which external binding addresses should be allocated, etc.
If the NAT External Port Style AVP is present, then the NAT device MUST select the external ports for the NAT bindings, per the style specified.
The NAT External Port Style is applicable for NAT  bindings defined by the NAT Control Definition AVPs
whose NAT  External Address or Port AVPs within the NAT External Address are unspecified.
[ NAT External Port Style ]
The NAT Control Remove AVP (AVP code 597) is of type Grouped, and it is used to deactivate or remove NAT bindings.
At least one of the two AVPs (NAT Control Definition AVP or NAT Control Binding Template AVP) SHOULD be present in the NAT Control Remove AVP.
The NAT Control Definition AVP (AVP code 598) is of type Grouped, and it describes a binding.
The NAT Control Definition AVP uniquely identifies the binding between the DNCA Diameter peers.
If both the NAT Internal Address and NAT External Address AVP(s) are supplied, it is a predefined binding.
If the NAT External Address AVP is not specified, then the NAT device MUST select the external port as per the NAT External Port Style AVP, if present in the NAT Control Definition AVP.
The Protocol AVP describes the transport protocol for the binding.
The NAT Control Definition AVP can contain either zero or one Protocol AVP.
If the Protocol AVP is omitted and if both internal and external IP addresses are specified, then the binding reserves the IP addresses for all transport protocols.
The Direction AVP is of type Enumerated.
It specifies the direction for the binding.
The values of the enumeration applicable in this context are: "IN","OUT".
If Direction AVP is OUT or absent, the NAT  Internal Address refers to the IP address of the endpoint that needs to be translated.
If Direction AVP is "IN", NAT Internal Address is the destination IP address that has to be translated.
The NAT Internal Address AVP (AVP code 599) is of type Grouped.
It describes the internal IP address and port for a binding.
Framed  IPV6 Prefix and Framed IP Address AVPs are mutually exclusive.
The endpoint identifier Framed IP Address, Framed IPv6 Prefix, and the internal address in this NAT Internal Address AVP to install NAT  bindings for the session MUST match.
[ Framed IPv6 Prefix ]
The NAT External Address AVP (AVP code 600) is of type Grouped, and it describes the external IP address and port for a binding.
The external IP address specified in this attribute can be reused for multiple endpoints by specifying the same address in the respective NAT External Address AVPs.
If the external IP address is not specified and the NAT External Port Style AVP is specified in the NAT Control Definition AVP, then the NAT device MUST select an external port as per the NAT External Port Style AVP.
[ Framed IP Address ]
The Max NAT Bindings AVP (AVP code 601) is of type Unsigned32.
It indicates the maximum number of NAT bindings allowed for a particular endpoint.
NAT Control Binding Template AVP
The NAT Control Binding Template AVP (AVP code 602) is of type OctetString.
It defines a name for a policy template that is predefined at the NAT device.
Details on the contents and structure of the template and configuration are outside the scope of this document.
The policy to which this AVP refers may contain NAT  bindings, an IP address pool for allocating the external IP address of a NAT binding, and a maximum number of allowed NAT bindings.
Such a policy template can be reused by specifying the same NAT Control  Binding Template AVP in the corresponding NAT Control Install AVPs of multiple endpoints.
AVP (AVP Code 603) is of type UTF8String.
It is used to report errors and contains the Session Id of an existing session.
NAT External Port Style AVP
The NAT External Port Style AVP (AVP Code 604) is of type Enumerated and contains the style to be followed while selecting the external port for a NAT binding relative to the internal port.
The following values are defined: FOLLOW INTERNAL PORT STYLE (1)
External port numbers selected MUST follow the same sequence and oddity as the internal ports of the NAT bindings.
The port oddity is required to support protocols like RTP and RTCP as defined in [RFC3550].
If for example the internal port in a requested NAT binding is odd numbered, then the external port allocated MUST also be odd numbered, and vice versa for an even numbered port.
In addition, the sequence of port numbering is maintained: if internal ports are consecutive, then the NAT device MUST choose consecutive external ports for the NAT  bindings.
The DNCA reuses session based accounting as defined in the Diameter base protocol [RFC6733] to report the bindings per endpoint.
This reporting is achieved by sending Diameter Accounting Request (ACR) commands [Start, Interim, and Stop] from the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device to its associated DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
sends an ACR Start on receiving an NCR with
NC Request Type AVP set to INITIAL REQUEST for a session or on creation of the first binding for a session requested in an earlier NCR.
DNCA may send ACR Interim updates, if required, either due to a change in bindings resulting from an NCR with
NC  Request Type AVP set to UPDATE REQUEST, periodically as specified in Acct Interim Interval by the DNCA Diameter
peer within the NAT controller, or when it creates or tears down bindings.
An ACR Stop is sent by the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device on receiving an STR message.
The function of correlating the multiple bindings used by an endpoint at any given time is relegated to the post processor.
The DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device may trigger an Interim accounting record when the maximum number of bindings, if received in an NCR, is reached.
The ACR and ACA messages are reused as defined in the Diameter base protocol [RFC6733] for exchanging endpoint NAT binding details between the DNCA Diameter peers.
The DNCA Application ID is used in the accounting commands.
The ACR contains one or more optional NAT  Control Record AVPs to report the bindings.
The NAT device indicates the number of allocated NAT bindings to the NAT controller using the Current NAT Bindings AVP.
This number needs to match the number of bindings identified as active within the NAT Control Record AVP.
In addition to AVPs for ACR specified in [RFC6733], the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT device
must add the NAT Control Record AVP.
The NAT Control Record AVP (AVP code 605) is of type Grouped.
It describes a binding and its status.
If NAT Control Binding Status is set to Created, Event Timestamp indicates the binding creation time.
If NAT Control Binding Status is set to Removed, Event Timestamp indicates the binding removal time.
If NAT Control Binding Status is active, Event Timestamp need not be present; if a value is present, it indicates that binding is active at the given time.
[ Event Timestamp ] 9.2.2.
The NAT Control Binding Status AVP (AVP code 606) is of type enumerated.
It indicates the status of the binding: created, removed, or active.
The following values are defined: Created (1)
The Current NAT Bindings AVP (AVP code 607) is of type Unsigned32.
It indicates the number of NAT bindings active on the NAT device.
The following sections present the AVPs defined in this document and specify the Diameter messages in which they can be present.
AVPs that can only be present within a Grouped AVP are not represented in this table.
The table uses the following symbols: 0
The AVP MUST NOT be present in the message. 0
Zero or more instances of the AVP can be present in the message. 0
It is considered an error if there is more than one instance of the AVP.
One instance of the AVP MUST be present in the message.
At least one instance of the AVP MUST be present in the message.
DNCA AVP Table for NAT Control Initial and Update Requests
The following table lists DNCA specific AVPs that have to be present in NCRs and NCAs with the NC Request Type set to INITIAL REQUEST or UPDATE REQUEST.
Note that any combination of NAT Control Install and NAT Control
Remove AVPs could be present in an update or initial requests.
NAT Control Install AVP nor the NAT Control
Remove AVP is present: This could, for example, be the case if the NAT controller would only want to receive accounting information but not control NAT bindings.
Install AVP is present: This could, for example, be the case if a new NAT binding is installed for an existing session.
Only NAT Control Remove AVP is present: This could, for example, be the case if a new NAT binding is removed from an existing session.
Install AVP and NAT Control
Remove AVP are present: This could, for example.
be the case if a formerly created NAT binding is removed and a new NAT binding is established within the same request.
DNCA AVP Table for Session Query Requests
The following table lists DNCA specific AVPs that have to be present in NCRs and NCAs with the NC Request Type set to QUERY REQUEST.
DNCA AVP Table for Accounting Messages
DNCA specific AVPs, which may or may not be present in ACR and ACA messages.
This section contains either the namespaces that have been created in this specification or the values assigned to existing namespaces managed by IANA.
In the subsections below, when we speak about review by a Designated Expert [RFC5226], please note that the Designated Expert will be assigned by the IESG.
Initially, such Expert discussions take place on the AAA WG mailing list.
This specification assigns the value 12, 'Diameter NAT Control Application', to the Application Identifier namespace defined in [RFC6733].
See Section 4 for more information.
This specification uses the value 330 from the Command code namespace defined in [RFC6733] for the NAT Control Request (NCR) and NAT  Control Answer (NCA) commands.
See Section 6.1 and Section 6.2 for more information on these commands.
This specification assigns the values 595 607 from the AVP Code namespace defined in [RFC6733].
See Section 8.7 for the assignment of the namespace in this specification.
This specification assigns the values 4014 and 5042 5047 from the Result Code AVP value namespace defined in [RFC6733].
See Section 8.2 for the assignment of the namespace in this specification.
As defined in Section 8.7.1, the NC Request Type AVP includes Enumerated type values 1 3.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
All remaining values are available for assignment by a Designated Expert [RFC5226].
NAT External Port Style AVP
As defined in Section 8.7.10, the NAT External Port Style AVP includes Enumerated type value 1.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
All remaining values are available for assignment by a Designated Expert [RFC5226].
NAT Control Binding Status AVP
As defined in Section 8.7.1, the NAT Control Binding Status AVP includes Enumerated type values 1 3.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
All remaining values are available for assignment by a Designated Expert [RFC5226].
This document describes procedures for controlling NAT related attributes and parameters by an entity, which is non local to the device performing NAT.
This section discusses security considerations for DNCA.
This includes the interactions between the Diameter peers within a NAT controller and a NAT device as well as general considerations for a NAT control in a service provider network.
Security between a NAT controller and a NAT device has a number of components: authentication, authorization, integrity, and confidentiality. "
Authentication" refers to confirming the identity of an originator for all datagrams received from the originator.
Lack of authentication of Diameter messages between the Diameter peers can jeopardize the fundamental service of the peering network elements.
A consequence of not authenticating the message sender by the recipient would be that an attacker could spoof the identity of a "legitimate" authorizing entity in order to change the behavior of the receiver.
An attacker could, for example, launch a DoS attack by setting the maximum number of bindings for a session on the NAT device to zero; provisioning bindings on a NAT device that includes IP addresses already in use in other parts of the network; or requesting session termination of the Diameter session and hampering an endpoint's (i.e., a user's) connectivity.
Lack of authentication of a NAT device to a NAT controller could lead to situations where the NAT device could provide a wrong view of the resources (i.e., NAT bindings).
In addition, a NAT binding Predefined template on the NAT device could be configured differently than expected by the NAT controller.
If either of the two DNCA Diameter peers fail to provide the required credentials, the failure should be subject to logging.
The corresponding logging infrastructure of the operator SHOULD be built in a way that it can mitigate potential DoS attacks resulting from large amounts of logging events.
This could include proper dimensioning of the logging infrastructure combined with policing the maximum amount of logging events accepted by the logging system to a threshold which the system is known to be able to handle.
"Authorization" refers to whether a particular authorizing entity is authorized to signal a network element request for one or more applications, adhering to a certain policy profile.
Failing the authorization process might indicate a resource theft attempt or failure due to administrative and/or credential deficiencies.
In either case, the network element should take the proper measures to log such attempts.
Integrity is required to ensure that a Diameter message exchanged between the Diameter peers has not been maliciously altered by intermediate devices.
The result of a lack of data integrity enforcement in an untrusted environment could be that an impostor will alter the messages exchanged between the peers.
This could cause a change of behavior of the peers, including the potential of a DoS. Confidentiality protection of Diameter messages ensures that the signaling data is accessible only to the authorized entities.
When signaling messages between the DNCA Diameter peers traverse untrusted networks, lack of confidentiality will allow eavesdropping and traffic analysis.
Diameter offers security mechanisms to deal with the functionality demanded above.
DNCA makes use of the capabilities offered by Diameter and the underlying transport protocols to deliver these requirements (see Section 5.1).
If the DNCA communication traverses untrusted networks, messages between DNCA Diameter peers SHOULD be secured using either IPsec or TLS.
Please refer to [RFC6733], Section 13 for details.
DNCA Diameter peers SHOULD perform bilateral authentication, authorization, as well as procedures to ensure integrity and confidentiality of the information exchange.
In addition, the Session Id chosen for a particular Diameter session
SHOULD be chosen in a way that it is hard to guess in order to mitigate issues through potential message replay.
DNCA Diameter peers SHOULD have a mutual trust setup.
This document does not specify a mechanism for authorization between the DNCA Diameter peers.
The DNCA Diameter peers SHOULD be provided with sufficient information to make an authorization decision.
The information can come from various sources, for example, the peering devices could store local authentication policy, listing the identities of authorized peers.
Any mechanism or protocol providing control of a NAT device, and DNCA is an example of such a control mechanism, could allow for misuse of the NAT device given that it enables the definition of per  destination or per source rules.
Misuse could include anti  competitive practices among providers, censorship, crime, etc.
NAT  control could be used as a tool for preventing or redirecting access to particular sites.
For instance, by controlling the NAT bindings, one could ensure that endpoints aren't able to receive particular flows, or that those flows are redirected to a relay that snoops or tampers with traffic instead of directly forwarding the traffic to the intended endpoint.
In addition, one could set up a binding in a way that the source IP address used is one of a relay so that traffic coming back can be snooped on or interfered with.
The operator also needs to consider security threats resulting from unplanned termination of the DNCA session.
Unplanned session termination, which could happen due to, e.g., an attacker taking down the NAT controller, leads to the NAT device cleaning up the state associated with this session after a grace period.
If the grace period is set to zero, the endpoint will experience an immediate loss of connectivity to services reachable through the NAT device following the termination of the DNCA session.
The protections on DNCA and its Diameter protocol exchanges don't prevent such abuses of NAT control.
Prevention of misuse or misconfiguration of a NAT device by an authorized NAT controller is beyond the scope of this protocol specification.
A service provider deploying DNCA needs to make sure that higher layer processes and procedures are put in place that allow them to detect and mitigate misuses.
This section shows example DNCA message content and exchange.
DNCA Session Establishment Example Figure 15 depicts a typical call flow for DNCA session establishment.
In this example, the NAT controller does the following: a.  requests a maximum of 100 NAT bindings for the endpoint.
b.  defines a static binding for a TCP connection that associates the internal IP Address:
Port 192.0.2.1:80 with the external IP Address:Port 198.51.100.1:80 for the endpoint.
c.  requests the use of a preconfigured template called "local  policy" while creating NAT bindings for the endpoint.
Detailed description of the steps shown in Figure 15: 1.
The NAT controller (co located with the NAS here) creates state for an endpoint based on a trigger.
This could, for example, be the successful establishment of a Point to Point Protocol (PPP) [RFC1661] access session.
Based on the configuration of the DNCA Diameter peer within the NAT controller, the NAT controller determines that NAT control is required and is to be enforced at a NAT device.
If there is no Diameter session already established with the DNCA Diameter peer within NAT device, a Diameter connection is established and Diameter Base CER/CEA are exchanged.
The NAT Controller creates an NCR message (see below) and sends it to the NAT device.
This example shows IPv4 to IPv4 address and port translation.
For IPv6 to IPv4 translation, the Framed  IP Address AVP would be replaced by the Framed IPv6 Address AVP with the value set to the IPv6 address of the endpoint.
< Diameter Header: 330, REQ, PXY
"natC.example.com" Origin Realm   "example.com" Destination Realm   "example.com" Destination Host   "nat device.example.com"
NC Request Type   INITIAL REQUEST User Name
" Framed IP Address   "
{ Framed IP Address   "
192.0.2.1" Port   80 } NAT External Address
The NAT device establishes a DNCA session as it is able to comply with the request.
The NAT device sends an NCA to indicate the successful completion of the request.
< Diameter Header: 330, PXY
example.com" NC Request Type   INITIAL REQUEST Result Code
The endpoint sends packets that reach the NAT device.
The NAT device performs NAT for traffic received from the endpoint with source address
192.0.2.1 and port 80 are translated to the external IP address 198.51.100.1 and port 80.
Traffic with source IP address
192.0.2.1 and a source port different from 80 will be translated to IP address 198.51.100.1 and a port chosen by the NAT device.
Note that this example assumes that the NAT device follows typical binding allocation rules for endpoints, in that only a single external IP address is used for all traffic received from a single IP address of an endpoint.
The NAT device will allow a maximum of 100 NAT bindings be created for the endpoint.
DNCA Session Update with Port Style Example
This section gives an example for a DNCA session update: A new set of NAT bindings is requested for an existing session.
The request contains a directive ( the "NAT External Port Style" AVP set to FOLLOW INTERNAL PORT STYLE)
that directs the NAT device to maintain port sequence and port oddity for the newly created NAT bindings.
In the example shown, the internal ports are UDP port 1036 and 1037.
The NAT device follows the directive selects the external ports accordingly.
The NAT device would, for example, create a mapping of 192.0.2.1:1036 to 198.51.100.1:5056 and 192.0.2.1:1037 to 198.51.100.1:5057, thereby maintaining port oddity (1036 5056, 1037 5057) and sequence ( the consecutive internal ports 1036 and 1037 map to the consecutive external ports 5056 and 5057).
< Diameter Header: 330, REQ, PXY
"natC.example.com" Origin Realm   "example.com" Destination Realm   "example.com" Destination Host   "nat device.example.com
{ Framed IP Address   "
{ Framed IP Address   "
This section shows an example for DNCA session query for a subscriber whose internal IP Address is 192.0.2.1.
< Diameter Header: 330, REQ, PXY>
"natC.example.com" Origin Realm   "example.com" Destination Realm   "example.com" Destination Host   "nat device.example.com"
QUERY REQUEST Framed IP Address   "
192.0.2.1" The NAT device constructs an NCA to report all currently active NAT  bindings whose internal address is 192.0.2.1.
< Diameter Header: 330, PXY >
{ Framed IP Address   "
192.0.2.1" Port   80 } NAT External Address
"198.51.100.1" Port   80 } Session Id
" Port   5057 } Session Id
In this example the NAT controller decides to terminate the previously established DNCA session.
This could, for example, be the case as a result of an access session (e.g., a PPP session) associated with an endpoint having been torn down.
NAT Control Session Termination Example
The following steps describe the sequence of events for tearing down the DNCA session in the example above: 1.
The NAT controller receives a trigger that a DNCA session associated with a specific endpoint should be terminated.
An example event could be the termination of the PPP [RFC1661] access session to an endpoint in a NAS.
The NAS correspondingly triggers the NAT controller request to tear down the associated DNCA session.
The NAT controller creates the required NCR message and sends it to the NAT device:
"natC.example.com" Origin Realm   "example.com" Destination Realm   "example.com" Destination Host   "nat device.example.com
" Termination Cause   DIAMETER LOGOUT 3.
The NAT device looks up the DNCA session based on the Session
Id AVP and finds a previously established active session.
The NAT device reports all NAT bindings established for that subscriber using an ACR:
Origin Realm   "example.com" Destination Realm   "
{ Framed IP Address   "
192.0.2.1" Port   5001 } NAT External Address
The NAT controller receives and processes the ACR as per its configuration.
It responds with an ACA to the NAT device.
< Diameter Header: 271, PXY
"natC.example.com:33041;23432;" Origin Host   "natC.example.com" Origin Realm   "
example.com" Result Code   DIAMETER SUCCESS Accounting Record Type   STOP RECORD Accounting Record Number   1 6.
On receipt of the ACA the NAT device cleans up all NAT bindings and associated session state for the endpoint.
NAT device sends an STA.
On receipt of the STA the NAT controller will clean up the corresponding session state.
"example.com" Result Code   DIAMETER SUCCESS
