Abstract The Point to Point Protocol (PPP) defines a Link Control Protocol (LCP) and a method for negotiating the use of multiprotocol traffic over point to point links.
This document describes PPP support for the Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links (TRILL) Protocol, allowing direct communication between Routing Bridges (RBridges) via PPP links.
The TRILL Protocol [RFC6325] defines a set of mechanisms used to communicate between RBridges.
These devices can bridge together large 802 networks using link state protocols in place of the traditional spanning tree mechanisms [RFC5556].
Over Ethernet, TRILL uses two separate Ethertypes to distinguish between encapsulation headers, which carry user data, and link state messages, which compute network topology using a protocol based on [IS IS]
These two protocols must be distinguished from one another, and segregated from all other traffic.
In a network where PPP [RFC1661] is used to interconnect routers (often over telecommunications links), it may be advantageous to be able to bridge between Ethernet segments over those PPP links, and thus integrate remote networks with an existing TRILL cloud.
The existing Bridging Control Protocol (BCP) [RFC3518] allows direct bridging of Ethernet frames over PPP.
However, this mechanism is inefficient and inadequate for TRILL, which can be optimized for use over PPP links.
To interconnect these devices over PPP links, three protocol numbers are needed, and are reserved as follows:
The usage of these three protocols is described in detail in the following section.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
The TRILL Network Control Protocol (TNCP) is responsible for negotiating the use of the TRILL Network Protocol (TNP) and TRILL Link State Protocol (TLSP) on a PPP link.
TNCP uses the same option negotiation mechanism and state machine as described for LCP (Section 4 of [RFC1661]).
TNCP packets MUST NOT be exchanged until PPP has reached the Network  Layer Protocol phase.
Any TNCP packets received when not in that phase MUST be silently ignored.
The encapsulated network layer data, carried in TNP packets, and topology information, carried in TLSP packets, MUST NOT be sent unless TNCP is in the Opened state.
If a TNP or TLSP packet is received when TNCP is not in the Opened state and LCP is in the Opened state, an implementation MUST silently discard the unexpected TNP or TLSP packet.
Exactly one TNCP packet is carried in the PPP Information field, with the PPP Protocol field set to hex 805d (TNCP).
A summary of the TNCP packet format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Only LCP Code values 1 through 7 (Configure Request, Configure Ack, Configure Nak, Configure Reject, Terminate Request, Terminate Ack, and Code Reject) are used.
All other codes SHOULD result in a TNCP Code Reject reply.
These are as documented for LCP.
This field contains data formatted as described in Section 5 of [RFC1661].
Codes 1 4 use Type Length Data sequences, Codes 5 and 6 use uninterpreted data, and Code 7 uses a Rejected Packet, all as described in [RFC1661].
Because no Configuration Options have been defined for TNCP, negotiating the use of the TRILL Protocol with IS IS for the link state protocol is the default when no options are specified.
A future document may specify the use of Configuration Options to enable different TRILL operating modes, such as the use of a different link state protocol.
When TNCP is in the Opened state, TNP packets are sent by setting the PPP Protocol field to hex 005d (TNP) and placing TRILL encapsulated data representing exactly one encapsulated packet in the PPP Information field.
This is identical to the TRILL Ethernet format (Section 4.1 of [RFC6325], "Ethernet Data Encapsulation"), except that the Outer MAC (Media Access Control) header and Ethertype are replaced by the PPP headers and Protocol Field, and the Ethernet Frame Check Sequence (FCS) is not present.
Both user data and End Station Address Distribution Information (ESADI)
packets are encoded in this format.
The PPP FCS follows the encapsulated data on links where the PPP FCS is in use.
Unlike the TRILL Ethernet encapsulation, PPP nodes do not have MAC addresses, so no outer MAC is present.
(High Level Data Link Control (HDLC) addresses
MAY be present in some situations; such usage is outside the scope of this document.)
When TNCP is in the Opened state, TLSP packets are sent by setting the PPP Protocol field to hex 405d (TLSP) and placing exactly one IS IS Payload (Section 4.2.3 of [RFC6325], "TRILL IS IS Frames") in the PPP Information field.
Note that point to point IS IS links have only an arbitrary circuit ID, and do not use MAC addresses for identification.
On a PPP link, TRILL always uses point to point (P2P) Hellos.
There is no need for TRILL Hello frames, nor is per port configuration necessary.
P2P Hello messages, per "Point to Point IS to IS hello PDU"
(Section 9.7 of [IS IS]), do not use Neighbor IDs in the same manner as on Ethernet.
However, per Section 4.2.4.1 of [RFC6325], the three way IS
IS handshake using extended circuit IDs is required on point to point links, such as PPP.
RBridges are never appointed forwarders on PPP links.
If an implementation includes BCP [RFC3518], then it MUST ensure that only one of BCP or TNCP is negotiated on a link, and not both.
If the peer is an RBridge, then there is no need to pass unencapsulated frames, as the link can have no TRILL ignorant peer to be concerned about.
If the peer is not an RBridge, then TNCP negotiation fails and TRILL is not used on the link.
An implementation that has only PPP links might have no Organizationally Unique Identifier (OUI) that can form an IS IS System ID.
Resolving that issue is outside the scope of this document; however, it is strongly RECOMMENDED that all TRILL implementations have at least one zero configuration mechanism to obtain a valid System ID.
[IS IS] regarding System ID uniqueness requirements.
TRILL MTU probe and TRILL MTU ack messages (Section 4.3.2 of [RFC6325]) are not needed on a PPP link.
Implementations MUST NOT send MTU probe messages and SHOULD NOT reply to these messages.
The MTU computed by LCP SHOULD be used instead.
Negotiating an LCP MTU of at least 1524, to allow for an inner Ethernet payload of 1500 octets, is RECOMMENDED.
Existing PPP and IS IS security mechanisms may play important roles in a network of RBridges interconnected by PPP links.
At the TRILL IS IS layer, the IS IS authentication mechanism [
[RFC5310] prevents fabrication of link state control messages.
Not all implementations need to include specific security mechanisms at the PPP layer, for example if they are designed to be deployed only in cases where the networking environment is trusted or where other layers provide adequate security.
A complete enumeration of possible deployment scenarios and associated threats and options is not possible and is outside the scope of this document.
For applications involving sensitive data, end to end security should always be considered in addition to link security to provide security in depth.
However, in case a PPP layer authentication mechanism is needed to protect the establishment of a link and identify a link with a known peer, implementation of the PPP Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol (CHAP)
Should greater flexibility than that provided by CHAP be required, the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)
[RFC3748] is a good alternative.
If TRILL over PPP packets also require confidentiality, the PPP Encryption Control Protocol (ECP) link encryption mechanisms [RFC1968] can protect the confidentiality and integrity of all packets on the PPP link.
And when PPP is run over tunneling mechanisms, such as the Layer Two Tunneling Protocol (L2TP) [RFC3931], tunnel security protocols may be available.
For general TRILL protocol security considerations, see [RFC6325].
IANA Considerations IANA has assigned three PPP Protocol field values, 005d, 405d, and 805d, as described in Section 1 of this document.
IANA has created a new "PPP TNCP Configuration Option Types" registry in the PPP Numbers registry, using the same format as the existing "PPP LCP Configuration Option Types" registry.
All TNCP Configuration Option Types except 0 are "Unassigned" and available for future use, based on "IETF Review", as described in BCP 26 [RFC5226].
Option 0 is allocated for use with Vendor Specific Options, as described in [RFC2153].
