Abstract The Point to Point Protocol (PPP) [1] provides a standard method for transporting multi protocol datagrams over point to point links.
PPP defines an extensible Link Control Protocol, and proposes a family of Network Control Protocols for establishing and configuring different network layer protocols.
This document defines the Network Control Protocol for establishing and configuring the Xerox Network Systems (XNS) Internet Datagram Protocol (IDP) over PPP.
Introduction PPP has three main components: 1.
A method for encapsulating multi protocol datagrams.
A Link Control Protocol (LCP) for establishing, configuring, and testing the data link connection.
A family of Network Control Protocols for establishing and configuring different network layer protocols.
In order to establish communications over a point to point link, each end of the PPP link must first send LCP packets to configure and test the data link.
After the link has been established and optional facilities have been negotiated as needed by the LCP, PPP must send XNSCP packets to choose and configure the XNS IDP network layer protocol.
Once XNSCP has reached the Opened state, XNS IDP datagrams can be sent over the link.
The link will remain configured for communications until explicit LCP or XNSCP packets close the link down, or until some external event occurs (an inactivity timer expires or network administrator intervention).
In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements of the specification.
These words are often capitalized.
This word, or the adjective "required", means that the definition is an absolute requirement of the specification.
This phrase means that the definition is an absolute prohibition of the specification.
This word, or the adjective "recommended", means that there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore this item, but the full implications must be understood and carefully weighed before choosing a different course.
This word, or the adjective "optional", means that this item is one of an allowed set of alternatives.
An implementation which does not include this option MUST be prepared to interoperate with another implementation which does include the option.
This document frequently uses the following terms: datagram  The unit of transmission in the network layer (such as IP).
A datagram may be encapsulated in one or more packets passed to the data link layer.
The unit of transmission at the data link layer.
A frame may include a header and/or a trailer, along with some number of units of data.
The basic unit of encapsulation, which is passed across the interface between the network layer and the data link layer.
A packet is usually mapped to a frame; the exceptions are when data link layer fragmentation is being performed, or when multiple packets are incorporated into a single frame.
The other end of the point to point link.
This means the implementation discards the packet without further processing.
The implementation SHOULD provide the capability of logging the error, including the contents of the silently discarded packet, and SHOULD record the event in a statistics counter.
A PPP Network Control Protocol for XNS IDP
The XNS IDP Control Protocol (XNSCP) is responsible for configuring, enabling, and disabling the XNS IDP protocol modules on both ends of the point to point link.
XNSCP uses the same packet exchange mechanism as the Link Control Protocol (LCP).
XNSCP packets may not be exchanged until PPP has reached the Network Layer Protocol phase.
XNSCP packets received before this phase is reached should be silently discarded.
The XNS IDP Control Protocol is exactly the same as the Link Control Protocol [1] with the following exceptions:
The packet may utilize any modifications to the basic frame format which have been negotiated during the Link Establishment phase.
Data Link Layer Protocol Field
Exactly one XNSCP packet is encapsulated in the Information field of a PPP Data Link Layer frame, where the PPP Protocol field indicates type hex 8025
Code field Only Codes 1 through 7 (Configure Request, Configure Ack, Configure Nak, Configure Reject, Terminate Request, Terminate Ack and Code Reject) are used.
Other Codes should be treated as unrecognized and should result in Code Rejects.
packets may not be exchanged until PPP has reached the Network Layer Protocol phase.
An implementation should be prepared to wait for Authentication and Link Quality Determination to finish before timing out waiting for a Configure Ack or other response.
It is suggested that an implementation give up only after user intervention or a configurable amount of time.
Configuration Option Types XNSCP has no Configuration Options.
Before any XNS IDP packets may be communicated, PPP must reach the Network Layer Protocol phase, and the XNS IDP Control Protocol must reach the Opened state.
Exactly one XNS IDP packet is encapsulated in the Information field of a PPP Data Link Layer frame where the Protocol field indicates type hex 0025
The maximum length of a XNS IDP datagram transmitted over a PPP link is the same as the maximum length of the Information field of a PPP data link layer frame.
Since there is no standard method for fragmenting and reassembling XNS IDP datagrams, PPP links supporting XNS IDP MUST allow at least 576 octets in the information field of a data link layer frame.
The format of the Information field itself is the same as that defined in [2].
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
Chair's Address The working group can be contacted via the current chair: Fred Baker Cisco Systems 519
Lado Drive Santa Barbara, California 93111
(805) 681 0115 EMail: fred@cisco.com
