This RFC, which contains the text of an Internet Draft that was submitted originally to the SIP Working Group, is being published now for the historical record and to provide a reference for later Informational RFCs.
This document proposes an extension to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).
This extension provides the ability for the called SIP user agent to identify from whom the call was diverted and why the call was diverted.
The extension defines a general header, Diversion, which conveys the diversion information from other SIP user agents and proxies to the called user agent.
This extension allows enhanced support for various features, including Unified Messaging, Third Party Voicemail, and Automatic Call Distribution (ACD).
SIP user agents and SIP proxies that receive diversion information may use this as supplemental information for feature invocation decisions.
This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is published for the historical record.
This document defines a Historic Document for the Internet community.
This is a contribution to the RFC Series, independently of any other RFC stream.
The RFC Editor has chosen to publish this document at its discretion and makes no statement about its value for implementation or deployment.
Documents approved for publication by the RFC Editor are not a candidate for any level of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of RFC 5741.
Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at http://www.rfc editor.org/info/rfc5806.
This document contains an early proposal to the IETF SIP Working Group that was not chosen for standardization.
Discussions on the topic resulted in the informational RFC 3325, "Private Extensions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity within Trusted Networks", and the standard solution that was chosen can be found in RFC 4244, "An Extension to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Request History Information".
Copyright Notice Copyright (c) 2010
IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document authors.
This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this document.
When Is the Diversion Header Used?
Night Service/Automatic Call Distribution (ACD)
This RFC, which contains the text of an Internet Draft that was submitted originally to the SIP Working Group, is being published now for the historical record and to provide a reference for later Informational RFCs.
In the legacy telephony network, redirection information is passed through the network in ISDN/ISUP (ISDN User Part) signaling messages.
This information is used by various service providers and business applications to support enhanced features for the end user.
An analogous mechanism of providing redirection information would enable such enhanced features for SIP users.
The Diversion header allows implementation of feature logic based on from whom the call was diverted.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
A change to the ultimate destination endpoint of a request.
A change in the Request URI of a request that was not caused by a routing decision.
This is also sometimes called a deflection or redirection.
A diversion can occur when the "user" portion of the Request URI is changed for a reason other than expansion or translation.
A diversion can occur when only the "host" portion of the Request  URI has changed if the change was due to a non routing decision.
The entity that diverted the call.
A SIP proxy or user agent that handles a received or internally generated 3xx response by forking new request(s) itself.
A SIP proxy or user agent that handles a received or internally generated 3xx response by forwarding it upstream.
Call Forward on Busy CFNA:
Call Forward on No Answer CFUNV:
In order to implement certain third party features such as Third  Party Voicemail and Automatic Call Distribution (ACD) applications, diversion information needs to be given to the called third party so that he may respond to the caller intelligently.
In these situations, the party receiving a diverted call needs answers for two questions:
Question 1: From whom was the request diverted?
Question 2: Why was the request diverted?
This document proposes usage of the Diversion header to answer these questions for the party receiving the diverted call.
Insertion of the previous Request URI (before the diversion occurred) into
the Diversion header answers question 1.
Insertion of the "reason" tag into the Diversion header (by the divertor)
When Is the Diversion Header Used?
The Diversion header SHOULD be added when a SIP proxy server, SIP redirect server, or SIP user agent changes the ultimate endpoint that will receive the call.
Diversion information SHOULD NOT be added for normal call routing changes to the Request URI.
Thus, the Diversion header is not added when features such as speed dial change the Request URI.
When a diversion occurs, a Diversion header SHOULD be added to the forwarded request or forwarded 3xx response.
The Diversion header MUST contain the Request URI of the request prior to the diversion.
The Diversion header SHOULD contain a reason that the diversion occurred.
Existing Diversion headers received in an incoming request MUST NOT be removed or changed in forwarded requests.
Existing Diversion headers received in an incoming response MUST NOT be removed or changed in the forwarded response.
A Diversion header is added when features such as call forwarding or call deflection change the Request URI.
no"   token   quoted string )
The following is an extension of tables 4 and 5 in [RFC3261] for the Diversion header: where  enc.
e e ACK BYE CAN INV
UAS Behavior A SIP User Agent Service (UAS) that receives a request and returns a 3xx SHOULD add a Diversion header containing the previous Request URI and the reason for the diversion.
UAC Behavior A SIP UAC that receives a 3xx containing a Diversion header SHOULD copy the Diversion header into each downstream forked request that resulted from the 3xx.
A SIP redirect server that receives a request and returns a 3xx containing a Contact that diverts the request to a different endpoint SHOULD add a Diversion header containing the Request URI from the incoming request and the reason for the diversion.
A non recursing SIP proxy that receives a 3xx containing a Diversion header SHOULD forward the 3xx containing the Diversion header upstream unchanged.
A SIP proxy that receives a request and invokes a feature that changes the Request URI of the forwarded request in order to divert the request to a different endpoint SHOULD add a Diversion header containing the Request URI from the incoming request and the reason for the diversion.
A SIP proxy that receives a request and returns a 3xx containing a Contact that diverts the request to a different endpoint SHOULD add a Diversion header containing the Request URI from the incoming request and the reason for the diversion.
{ Add the Diversion header (indicating the reason that the call has been diverted) to the downstream forwarded request(s).
There are several implementations of call forwarding features that can be implemented by either recursing or non recursing SIP proxies or SIP user agents.
A SIP proxy or user agent that generates or forwards 3xxs upstream is non recursing.
A SIP proxy or user agent that handles received (or internally generated)
The following examples illustrate usage of the Diversion header for some of the variants of recursing and non recursing proxies and user agents.
Call Forward Unconditional Usage of the Diversion header is shown below for several variant implementations of Call Forward Unconditional.
In this message flow, the call would normally be routed to Bob@B.
However, Proxy 2 (P2) recursively implements Call
(P1 Non Recursing, P2 Non  Recursing)
In this message flow, Proxy 2 (P2) non recursively implements Call
Proxy 1 (P1) is non  recursing.
(P1 Recursing, P2 Non  Recursing)
In this message flow, Proxy 2 (P2) non recursively implements Call
Proxy 1 (P1) is recursing.
Unconditional (P1 Recursing, P2 Non
In this message flow, user agent server B (B)
Unconditional (CFUNC) to Carol@C.  Proxy 2 (P2) is non recursing.
Proxy 1 (P1) is recursing.
Forward on Busy Usage of the Diversion header is shown below for several variant implementations of Call Forward on Busy.
Network Call Forward on Busy (P2 Recursing)
Network Call Forward on Busy (P1 Non Recursing, P2 Non  Recursing)
In this message flow, Proxy 2 (P2) non recursively implements Call Forward on Busy (CFB) to Carol@C.  Proxy 1 (P1)
Network Call Forward on Busy (P1 Recursing, P2 Non Recursing)
In this message flow, Proxy 2 (P2) non recursively implements Call Forward on Busy (CFB) to Carol@C.  Proxy 1 (P1) is recursing.
Endpoint Call Forward on Busy (P1 Recursing, P2 Non Recursing)
In this message flow, user agent server B (B)
Call Forward on Busy (CFB) to Carol@C.  Proxy 2 (P2) is non recursing.
Proxy 1 (P1) is recursing.
Forward on No Answer Usage of the Diversion header is shown below for several variant implementations of Call Forward on No Answer.
Network Call Forward on No Answer (P2 Recursing)
Network Call Forward on No Answer
(P1 Non Recursing, P2 Non  Recursing)
In this message flow, Proxy 2 (P2) non recursively implements Call Forward on No Answer (CFNA) to Carol@C.  Proxy 1 (P1) is non  recursing.
Network Call Forward on No Answer
(P1 Recursing, P2 Non  Recursing)
In this message flow, Proxy 2 (P2) non recursively implements Call Forward on No Answer (CFNA) to Carol@C.  Proxy 1 (P1) is recursing.
Endpoint Call Forward on No Answer
(P1 Recursing, P2 Non  Recursing,
In this message flow, user agent server B (B)
Call Forward on No Answer (CFNA) to Carol@C.  Proxy 2 (P2) is non recursing.
Proxy 1 (P1) is recursing.
Call Forward on Unavailable Usage of the Diversion header is shown below for several variant implementations of Call Forward on Unavailable.
Network Call Forward on Unavailable (P2 Recursing)
Network Call Forward on Unavailable (P1 Non Recursing, P2 Non  Recursing)
In this message flow, Proxy 2 (P2) non recursively implements Call Forward on Unavailable (CFUNV) to Carol@C.  Proxy 1 (P1) is non  recursing.
Network Call Forward on Unavailable
(P1 Recursing, P2 Non  Recursing)
In this message flow, Proxy 2 (P2) non recursively implements Call Forward on Unavailable (CFUNV) to Carol@C.  Proxy 1 (P1) is recursing.
Multiple Diversions Usage of the Diversion header when multiple diversions occur are shown the following two examples.
In this message flow, Proxy 2 (P2) implements Call
Unconditional (CFUNC) to Carol@C.  C
Call Forward on Busy (CFB) to 5551234@D.  P2 is non recursing.
In this message flow, Proxy 2 (P2) implements Call
(P2 would normally have routed the call to B).
Call Forward on No Answer (CFNA) to 5551234@D.  P2 is recursing.
There are some privacy considerations when using the Diversion header.
Usage of the Diversion header implies that the diverting UAS trusts the diverted to UAS.
Usage of the Diversion header by SIP proxies or SIP user agents can cause information leakage of route information and called information to untrusted SIP proxies and untrusted callers in upstream 3xxs.
Leakage of this information can be mitigated by having a recursing trusted upstream proxy server.
For a SIP network architecture where all proxies are required to be non recursive, Diversion header hiding may be considered necessary in order to prevent leakage of route information to the caller.
To accomplish Diversion header hiding, a trusted upstream proxy would add a Record Route header and use a secret key to encrypt the contents of the Diversion header in 3xxs that are forwarded upstream.
On receipt of re INVITEs, the proxy would decrypt the contents of the Diversion header (using its secret key) and forward the INVITE.
There is no currently defined interaction of the Diversion and Hide headers.
Only the relevant headers have been included in the following examples.
The contents of the Session Description Protocols (SDPs) have also been omitted.
Night Service/Automatic Call Distribution (ACD)
In the following two message flows, two separate companies, WeSellPizza.com and WeSellFlowers.com, have contracted with a third company, NightService.com to provide nighttime support for their incoming voice calls.
In the first flow, Alice calls out for pizza.
In the second flow, Alice calls for roses.
In both instances, the same night service company (and receptionist, Carol) answers the call.
However, because the Diversion header is used, Carol is able to customize her greeting to the caller.
[1] SIP UAC to SIP proxy server 1: INVITE
Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp
The ISP's originating proxy translated the keyword pizza to the company WeSellPizza.com [2] SIP proxy server 1 to SIP proxy server 2 (WeSellPizza.com):
Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp
It's after midnight and the pizza people are in bed.
Fortunately, WeSellPizza.com has contracted with NightService.com to answer their nighttime calls.
Thus, P2 implements CFTOD to NightService.com.
[3] SIP proxy server 2 (WeSellPizza.com) to SIP proxy server 3 (NightService.com):
Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
;reason time of day Content Type: application/sdp
Carol is available to receive the incoming call.
[4] SIP proxy server 3 (NightService.com) to UAS1 (Carol): INVITE sip:carol@uas1.nightservice.com
Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
;reason time of day Content Type: application/sdp
The ACD keys off the Diversion header to pull up the WeSellPizza FAQ on Carol's web browser.
[5] UAS1 to SIP proxy server 3: SIP/2.0
pizza@p1.isp.com>;tag uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp [6] SIP proxy server 3 to SIP proxy server 2:
pizza@p1.isp.com>;tag uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp [7] SIP proxy server 2 to SIP proxy server 1:
pizza@p1.isp.com>;tag uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp [8] SIP proxy server 1 to UAC
pizza@p1.isp.com>;tag uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp [9] SIP UAC to UAS1:
pizza@p1.isp.com>;tag uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
The RTP flows begin and Carol answers "Hello, WeSellPizza.
How may I help you?"
[1] SIP UAC to SIP proxy server 1: INVITE
Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp
The ISP's originating proxy translated the keyword roses to the company
[2] SIP proxy server 1 to SIP proxy server 4 (WeSellFlowers.com):
Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/
It's now 1 a.m. and the florists are also in bed.
Fortunately, WeSellFlowers.com has contracted with NightService.com to answer their nighttime calls, too.
Thus, P4 implements CFTOD to NightService.com.
[3] SIP proxy server 4 (WeSellFlowers.com) to SIP proxy server 1
roses@p1.isp.com>;tag p4 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
;reason time of day [4] SIP proxy server 1 to SIP proxy server 4 (WeSellFlowers.com): ACK sip:
roses@p1.isp.com>;tag p4 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE [5] SIP proxy server 1 (WeSellFlowers.com) to SIP proxy server 3 (NightService.com):
Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
;reason time of day Content Type: application/sdp
Carol is available to receive the incoming call.
[6] SIP proxy server 3 (NightService.com) to UAS1 (Carol): INVITE sip:carol@uas1.nightservice.com
Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
;reason time of day Content Type: application/sdp
The ACD keys off the Diversion header to pull up the WeSellFlowers FAQ on Carol's web browser.
[7] SIP UAS1 to SIP proxy server 3:
carol@uas1.nightservice.com From: sip:alice@isp.com To: <sip:
uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp [8] SIP proxy server 3 to SIP proxy server 1:
carol@uas1.nightservice.com From: sip:alice@isp.com To: <sip:
uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp [9] SIP proxy server 1 to UAC
carol@uas1.nightservice.com From: sip:alice@isp.com To: <sip:
uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp [10] SIP UAC to SIP UAS1:
uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
The RTP flows begin and Carol answers "Hello, WeSellFlowers.
How may I help you?"
Voicemail Service Using Diversion Header Bob has contracted his Voicemail to a third party company, Voicemail.com.
In this message flow, Bob has hit the Do Not Disturb button on his phone.
functionality of Bob's phone is configured to CFUNC (Call Forward Unconditional) to voicemail@isp.com.
Because the Diversion header is used, Voicemail.com is able to place the incoming call into Bob's voice mailbox.
[1] SIP UAC to SIP proxy server 1: INVITE
sip:Bob@p1.isp.com Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp
The ISP's originating proxy routes the request to proxy 2 (P2).
[2] SIP proxy server 1 to SIP proxy server 2: INVITE sip:Bob@p2.isp.com
sip:Bob@p1.isp.com Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp [3] SIP proxy server 2 to UAS1 (Bob's SIP phone):
sip:Bob@p1.isp.com Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp Since Bob had hit the Do Not Disturb button on his SIP phone, Bob's phone forwards the call to his voicemail service.
[4] User agent server 1 (UAS1) to SIP proxy server 2 (P2)
uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
;reason do not disturb [5] SIP proxy server 2 to UAS1 (Bob's SIP phone):
uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE [6] SIP proxy server 2 (P2) to SIP proxy server 1 (P1):
uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
;reason do not disturb [7] SIP proxy server 1 to SIP proxy server 2: ACK sip:Bob@p2.isp.com
uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE [8] SIP proxy server 1 (P1)
uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
;reason do not disturb [9] SIP UAC to SIP proxy server 1: ACK sip:Bob@p1.isp.com
uas1 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE [10] SIP UAC (alice pc) to Voicemail server.
sip:Bob@p1.isp.com Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
;reason do not disturb Content Type: application/sdp [11]
Voicemail server to SIP UAC (alice pc):
uas2 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
1 INVITE Content Type: application/sdp [12] SIP UAC to Voicemail server: ACK sip:Voicemail@isp.com
uas2 Call ID: 12345600@alice pc.isp.com CSeq:
Because the Diversion header is present, the Voicemail server is able to place Alice's message into Bob's voice mailbox.
Questions and Answers on Alternative Approaches Question 1: Why do we need the Diversion header when we can see the To: header?
The To: header is not guaranteed to have significance to the called party.
For example, the To: header may contain a locally significant URL (to the caller) such as a private numbering plan, speed dial digits, telephony escape digits, or telephony prefix digits.
Without a Diversion header, enumerating all possible locally significant To: headers that anyone might use to contact Bob@uas1.isp.com becomes a configuration problem at Voicemail@isp.com and is prone to namespace collision.
Support for Diversion headers enables Bob to contract a third  party service (Voicemail@isp.com) with a single globally significant URL for his voice mailbox (Bob@uas1.isp.com).
Given a set of multiple diversions, there is a policy decision of which Diversion header takes precedence for service logic.
Different services (or even different users for the same service) may want to configure this policy differently (first, last, second to last, etc.).
Question 2: Why do we need the Diversion header when we can see the Via:
The Via header does not contain information about servers whom have deflected the call (using a 3xx).
Mapping ISUP/ISDN Redirection Information to SIP Diversion Header
The discussions below regarding ISUP/ISDN reflect generic elements in ISUP/ISDN.
In some variations of ISUP/ISDN, the information elements are represented differently.
Regardless of the ISUP/ISDN variant, translation should be performed for the "first redirecting number" and the "last redirecting number".
In order to prevent ambiguity, it is important to highlight a terminology mismatch between ISUP/ISDN and SIP.
In SIP, a "redirect" indicates the act of returning a 3xx response.
In ISUP/ISDN, a "redirection" is diversion of a call by a network entity.
In ISUP/ISDN, a call may also be deflected (by an endpoint).
Diversion is the more generic term that refers to either the act of an network redirection or endpoint deflection.
In SIP, Diversion can be implemented as either an upstream 3xx (non  recursive) or an additionally forked downstream request (recursive).
In the following text, a lowercase "redirect" indicates the SIP usage, while an uppercase "Redirect" indicates ISUP usage.
Mapping ISUP/ISDN Diversion Reason Codes ISUP and ISDN define the following diversion reasons:
Call forwarding busy or called DTE busy 0010
Call forwarding no reply 1111
Call forwarding unconditional or systematic call redirection 1010   Call deflection or call forwarding by the called DTE 1001
Call forwarding DTE out of order Mapping of ISUP/ISDN reason codes to Diversion reason codes is performed as follows:
Mapping ISUP Redirection Information to SIP Diversion Header
This section describes how generic ISUP diversion information elements may be translated across an ISUP/SIP gateway.
ISUP Definitions Called Party Number
The number of the party to which the call is currently being routed.
The number to which the call was being routed when the last diversion occurred.
The reason that the last diversion occurred.
The number to which the call was being routed when the first diversion occurred.
The reason that the first diversion occurred.
The count of the total number of diversions that have occurred.
ISUP Parameters When a SIP call transits a SIP/ISUP gateway
, the following information in the ISUP message should be examined/set when translating SIP Diversion headers to ISUP diversion information: 1) Redirecting Number 2)
Original Called Number 5) Original Redirecting Reason 6)
An ISUP message contains information on the first and last diversions that occurred.
The Redirection number is the number to which the call was being routed when the last diversion occurred.
The Redirecting Reason is the reason that the last diversion occurred.
The Original Called Number is the number to which the call was being routed when the first diversion occurred.
The Original Redirecting Reason is the reason that the first diversion occurred.
When only one Diversion has occurred, the number to which the call was being routed when the diversion occurred is in the Redirecting Number and the reason for that diversion is carried in the Redirect Reason.
The ISUP Redirecting Number SHOULD be used to set the value of the name addr of the top most Diversion header.
The ISUP Redirecting Number address presentation SHOULD be used to set the value of the diversion privacy of the top most Diversion header.
The ISUP Redirecting Reason SHOULD be used to set the value of the diversion  reason of the top most Diversion header.
When present, the Original Called Number SHOULD be used to set the name addr of the bottom most Diversion header.
When present, the Original Redirecting Reason SHOULD be used to set the diversion reason of the bottom most Diversion header.
When present, the Original Address Presentation SHOULD be used to set the diversion privacy of the bottom most Diversion header.
The Redirection Counter value minus 1 SHOULD be stored in the diversion  counter associated with the top most Diversion header.
Presence of the diversion counter for the bottom most Diversion header is optional.
If present, the diversion counter of the bottom
most Diversion header SHOULD be 1.
The name addr of the top most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the ISUP Redirecting Number.
The diversion reason of the top most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the ISUP Redirecting Reason.
The diversion privacy of the top most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the ISUP Redirecting Address Presentation.
When multiple Diversion headers are present, the name addr of the bottom  most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the ISUP Original Redirecting Number.
When multiple Diversion headers are present, the diversion reason of the bottom most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the ISUP Original Redirecting Reason.
When multiple Diversion headers are present, the diversion privacy of the bottom most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the ISUP Original Redirecting Address Presentation.
The ISUP Redirection Counter SHOULD be set equal to the sum of the counters of all Diversion headers in the SIP message.
A Diversion header that does not explicitly specify a diversion counter tag counts as 1.
Example of ISUP to SIP Translation ISUP/SIP GW
Address Presentation  presentation restricted Original Called Number   19195551001
Example of SIP to ISUP
Address Presentation  presentation restricted Original Called Number   19195551001
Mapping ISDN Redirection Information to SIP Diversion Header
An ISDN message can contain up to two instances of a Redirecting Number information element.
When a diversion occurs, an additional Redirection number information element is added.
When a third (or greater) diversion occurs, the new Redirecting Number information element replaces the bottom most Redirection number information element.
ISDN Definitions Called Party Number
The number of the party to which the call is currently being routed.
The number to which the call was being routed when the last diversion occurred.
The reason that the last diversion occurred.
ISDN Parameters When a SIP call transits a SIP/ISDN gateway
, the following information in the ISDN message should be examined/set when translating SIP Diversion headers to ISDN diversion information
: 1) Redirecting Number of the top most Redirecting Number information element 2) Reason for diversion of the top most Redirection number information element 3) Origin of Number and Presentation Status of the top most Redirection number information element 4)
Redirection number of the bottom most Redirection number information element 5
) Reason for diversion of the bottom most Redirection number information element 6) Origin of Number and Presentation Status of the bottom most Redirection number information element
An ISDN message contains information on the first and last diversions that occurred.
The top most Redirection number information element contains information (including the Redirecting Number, Origin of Number, Presentation Status, and Reason for diversion) about the last diversion that occurred.
The bottom most Redirection number information element contains information (including the Redirecting Number, Origin of Number, Presentation Status, and Reason for diversion) about the first diversion that occurred.
If only one Diversion has occurred, only one Redirection number information element is present.
The Redirecting Number information element has the same Type of Number/Numbering Plan, and Digits as the Calling Party Number information element.
There is no Redirection Counter associated with this ISDN information element.
Notice that the order of the Redirection number information elements in an ISDN message (top first, bottom last) is reversed from the order of Diversion headers in a SIP message (top last, bottom first).
The Redirecting Number of the top most ISDN Redirecting Number information element SHOULD be used to set the value of the name addr of the bottom most Diversion header.
The Reason for Diversion of the top most ISDN Redirecting Number information element SHOULD be used to set the value of the diversion reason of the bottom most Diversion header.
The Origin of Number of the top most ISDN Redirecting Number information element SHOULD be used to set the value of the diversion  screen of the bottom most Diversion header.
The Presentation Status of the top most ISDN Redirecting Number information element SHOULD be used to set the value of the diversion privacy of the bottom most Diversion header.
The Redirecting Number of the bottom most ISDN Redirecting Number information element SHOULD be used to set the value of the name addr of the top most Diversion header.
The Reason for Diversion of the bottom most ISDN Redirecting Number information element SHOULD be used to set the value of the diversion reason of the top most Diversion header.
The Origin of Number of the bottom most ISDN Redirecting Number information element SHOULD be used to set the value of the diversion  screen of the top most Diversion header.
The Presentation Status of the bottom most ISDN Redirecting Number information element SHOULD be used to set the value of the diversion privacy of the top most Diversion header.
Presence of the diversion counter in each of the Diversion headers is optional.
If present, the diversion counter of each Diversion header SHOULD be 1.
9.3.4.  SIP to ISDN Translation
The name addr of the top most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the Redirecting Number of the bottom most ISDN Redirecting Number information element.
The diversion reason of the top most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the Reason for Diversion of the bottom most ISDN Redirecting Number information element.
The diversion screen of the top most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the Origin of Number of the bottom most ISDN Redirecting Number information element.
The diversion privacy of the top most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the Presentation Status of the bottom most ISDN Redirecting Number information element.
The name addr of the bottom most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the Redirecting Number of the top most ISDN Redirecting Number information element.
The diversion reason of the bottom most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the Reason for Diversion of the top most ISDN Redirecting Number information element.
The diversion screen of the bottom most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the Origin of Number of the top most ISDN Redirecting Number information element.
The diversion privacy of the bottom most Diversion header SHOULD be used to set the Presentation Status of the top most ISDN Redirecting Number information element.
Example of ISDN to SIP Translation ISDN/SIP GW
Example of SIP to ISDN Translation ISDN/SIP GW
Information Loss in SIP to ISUP/ISDN Translation
Because ISUP and ISDN only support a subset of the information in a SIP Diversion header, information loss occurs during translation at a SIP/ISUP or SIP/ISDN boundary.
Loss of Diversion URI Information
Because ISUP and ISDN only support a subset of URI types (specifically tel: URIs and sip:x@y;user phone URIs), diversion information occurring for other URI types may be lost when crossing from SIP to ISDN or ISUP.
Loss of Diversion Reason Information
Because ISUP and ISDN only support a subset of the reason codes supported by the Diversion header, specific reason code information may be lost when crossing from SIP to ISDN or ISUP.
Loss of Diversion Counter Information Because ISDN does not support a counter field (indicating the number of diversions that have occurred), counter information may be lost when crossing from SIP to ISDN.
Contributors Special acknowledgement to both Bryan Byerly and JR Yang.
As original authors of this document, both were instrumental is getting this document written.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank David Williams, Ameet Kher, Satya Khatter, Manoj Bhatia, Shail Bhatnagar, Denise Caballero Mccann, Kara Adams, Charles Eckel of Cisco Systems, and Bert Culpepper of InterVoice  Brite for their insights, inputs, and comments.
Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.
[RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.
Authors' Addresses Steve Levy Cisco Systems 7025
Kit Creek Road P.O. Box 14987 Research Triangle Park
, NC  27709 USA EMail:
Orange Labs 38 40 rue du General Leclerc Issy Les Moulineaux Cedex 9
92794 France Phone:  33145294514 EMail: marianne.mohali@orange ftgroup.com
