Abstract This document specifies a way to create subscription to a list of resources in SIP.
This is achieved by including the list of resources in the body of a SUBSCRIBE request.
Instead of having a subscriber send a SUBSCRIBE request for each resource individually, the subscriber defines the resource list, subscribes to it, and gets notifications about changes in the resources' states using a single SUBSCRIBE dialog.
Introduction [RFC4662] specifies how to establish subscriptions to a homogeneous resource list in SIP (which is specified in [RFC3261]) and defines the procedures for getting notifications about changes in the state of the associated resources.
Yet, list creation is outside the scope of [RFC4662].
This document specifies a way to create a list with a set of resources and subscribe to it using a single SIP request.
This is achieved by including the list of resources (as defined in [RFC5363]) in the body of the SUBSCRIBE request.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
A UAC (User Agent Client) that wants to create a resource list and subscribe to it using the mechanism described in this document constructs a SUBSCRIBE request with at least one body, whose disposition is type "recipient list" as defined in [RFC5363], that contains the URI list.
Additionally, the UAC MUST include the 'recipient list subscribe' option tag (which is registered with the IANA in Section 9) in a Require header field.
The UAC MUST build the rest of the SUBSCRIBE request following the rules in [RFC3265].
The UAC MUST support the "rlmi xml" format defined in [RFC4662] and signal this by including "rlmi xml" in the Accept header.
The UAC MAY support additional formats and include them in the Accept header field of the SUBSCRIBE request.
The status code in the response to the SUBSCRIBE request does not provide any information about whether or not the resource list server was able to successfully subscribe to the URIs in the URI list.
The UAC obtains this information in the notifications sent by the server.
The previous sections have specified how to include a URI list in an initial SUBSCRIBE request to a resource list server in order to subscribe to the state of a set of resources.
Once the subscription has been created and a dialog between the UAC and the resource list server has been established, the UAC can send subsequent SUBSCRIBE requests to, for example, extend the duration of the subscription.
At this point, there are no semantics associated with resource list bodies in subsequent SUBSCRIBE requests (although future extensions can define them).
Therefore, UACs SHOULD NOT include resource list bodies in subsequent SUBSCRIBE requests to a resource list server.
Note that a difference between an initial SUBSCRIBE request and subsequent ones is that while the initial request is sent to the public URI of the resource list, subsequent ones are sent to the URI provided by the server when the dialog is established.
Therefore, from the UAC's point of view, the resource identified by the former URI supports recipient list bodies, while the resource identified by the latter does not support them. 4.
URI List Document Format [
RFC5363] mandates that each URI list services specification, such as the subscription service defined here, specifies the default format for the recipient list bodies used within the particular service.
The default format for the recipient list bodies for the subscription service defined in this document is the resource list format defined in [RFC4826].
UAs (User Agents) generating recipient list bodies MUST support this format and MAY support other formats.
Resource list servers able to handle recipient list bodies MUST support this format and MAY support other formats.
The Extensible Markup Language (XML) Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP) resource list document provides features, such as hierarchical lists and the ability to include entries by reference relative to the XCAP root URI
, that are not needed by the subscription service defined here, which only needs to transfer a flat list of URIs between a UA and the resource list server.
Therefore, when using the default resource list document, UAs SHOULD use flat lists (i.e., no hierarchical lists) and SHOULD NOT use <entry ref> elements.
A resource list server receiving a URI list with more information than what has just been described MAY discard all the extra information.
Figure 1 shows an example of a flat list that follows the resource list document.
xml version "1.0" encoding "UTF 8"?
resource lists" xmlns:xsi "http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema instance"
Resource List Server Behavior Resource list servers that are able to receive and process SUBSCRIBE requests with a recipient list body SHOULD include a 'recipient list  subscribe' option tag in a Supported header field when responding to OPTIONS requests.
On reception of a SUBSCRIBE request with a URI list, a resource list server that chooses to accept the "rlmi xml" format MUST comply with [RFC4662] for creating the subscription and reporting the changes in the resources within the created dialog.
At this point, there are no semantics associated with resource list bodies in subsequent SUBSCRIBE requests (although future extensions may define them).
Therefore, a resource list server receiving a subsequent SUBSCRIBE request with a resource list body, following standard SIP procedures, rejects it with a 415 (Unsupported Media Type) response.
Providing a URI to Manipulate a Resource List
A UAC can manipulate a resource list at a resource list server.
The resource list server MAY provide a URI to manipulate the resource list associated with a subscription using the Call Info header field in the NOTIFY request that establishes the subscription.
The "purpose" parameter of the Call Info header field MUST have a value of 'list management', which we register with the IANA in Section 9.
The following is an example of such a header field.
<http://xcap.example.com/your list.xml> ;purpose list management
The lifetime of a resource list to be manipulated by the URI provided by the server is bundled to the lifetime of the subscription.
That is, the resource list SHOULD be destroyed when the subscription expires or is otherwise terminated.
Section 7.1 of [RFC3265] does not list the Call Info header field in the table of header fields that NOTIFY requests can carry.
This document updates that table so that the Call Info header field can be optionally included in NOTIFY requests.
The following is an example of a SUBSCRIBE request, which carries a URI list in its body, sent by a UAC to a resource list server.
cdB34qLToC@terminal.example.com CSeq: 1 SUBSCRIBE Contact:
7200 Require: recipient list subscribe
application/cpim pidf xml Accept: application/rlmi xml Accept: multipart/related Accept:
multipart/signed Accept: multipart/encrypted Content Type:
application/resource lists xml Content Disposition:
recipient list Content Length: 337 <?
xml version "1.0" encoding "UTF 8"?
resource lists" xmlns:xsi "http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema instance"
Figure 2: SUBSCRIBE request 8.
The Security Considerations section of [RFC4662] discusses security issues related to resource list servers.
Resource list servers accepting request contained URI lists MUST also follow the security guidelines given in [RFC4662].
"Framework and Security Considerations for Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
[RFC5363] discusses issues related to SIP URI list services.
Given that a resource list server sending SUBSCRIBE requests to a set of users acts as a URI list service, implementations of resource list servers that handle request  contained URI lists MUST follow the security related rules in [RFC5363].
These rules include opt in lists and mandatory authentication and authorization of clients.
The following sections describe the IANA registration of the 'list  management' value for the "purpose" parameter of the Call Info header field and the 'recipient list subscribe' SIP option tag.
List Management Purpose Parameter Value
This document defines the 'list management' value for the "purpose" parameter of the Call Info header field.
A reference to this RFC (in double brackets) has been added to the existing "purpose" Call Info parameter entry in the SIP Parameters registry, which currently looks as follows:
This document defines the SIP option tag "recipient list subscribe".
This option tag is used to   [RFC5367]
