Abstract There are deployments where the Layer 3 interface on which IS IS operates is a Layer 2 interface bundle.
IS advertisements only support advertising link attributes of the Layer 3 interface.
If entities external to IS IS wish to control traffic flows on the individual physical links that comprise the Layer 2 interface bundle, link attribute information about the bundle members is required.
This document introduces the ability for IS IS to advertise the link attributes of Layer 2 (L2) Bundle Members.
There are deployments where the Layer 3 interface on which an IS IS adjacency is established
is a Layer 2 interface bundle, for instance, a Link Aggregation Group (LAG) [IEEE802.1AX].
This reduces the number of adjacencies that need to be maintained by the routing protocol in cases where there are parallel links between the neighbors.
Entities external to IS IS such as Path Computation Elements (PCEs)
[RFC4655] may wish to control traffic flows on individual members of the underlying Layer 2 bundle.
In order to do so, link attribute information about individual bundle members is required.
The protocol extensions defined in this document provide the means to advertise this information.
This document introduces a new TLV to advertise link attribute information for each of the L2 Bundle Members that comprise the Layer 3 interface on which
[RFC8667] introduces a new link attribute, adjacency segment identifier (Adj SID), which can be used as an instruction to forwarding to send traffic over a specific link.
This document introduces additional sub TLVs to advertise Adj SIDs for L2 Bundle Members.
Note that the new advertisements defined in this document are intended to be provided to external (to IS IS) entities.
This is determined by the needs of the external entities.
A minimum or default set of link attributes.
How these attributes are configured.
How the advertisements are used.
What impact the use of these advertisements may have on traffic flow in the network.
How the advertisements are passed to external entities.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
TLV A new TLV is introduced to advertise L2 Bundle Member attributes.
Although much of the information is identical to and uses the same sub TLVs included in Extended IS Neighbor advertisements (TLVs 22 and 222), a new TLV is used so that changes to the advertisement of the L2 Bundle Member link attributes
do not trigger unnecessary action by the [ISO10589] Decision Process.
Advertisement of this information implies that the identified link is a member of the L2 Bundle associated with the identified Parent L3 Neighbor and that the member link is operationally up.
Therefore, advertisements MUST be withdrawn if the link becomes operationally down
or it is no longer a member of the identified L2 Bundle.
This new TLV utilizes the sub TLV space defined for TLVs 22, 23, 141, 222, and 223.
The following new TLV is introduced: L2 Bundle Member Attributes Type: 25 Length: Number of octets to follow Parent L3 Neighbor Descriptor L3 Neighbor System ID   pseudonode ID (7 octets)
Flags:  1 octet field of the following flags: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
When set to 1, one of the sub TLVs described in Section 3.1 immediately follows the flags field.
If the P Flag is set to 0, then none of the sub
TLVs described in Section 3.1 are present.
MUST be zero when originated and ignored when received.
One or more L2 Bundle Attribute Descriptors (as defined below).
Length of L2 Bundle Attribute Descriptor (1 octet) NOTE:
This includes all fields described below.
Number of L2 Bundle Member Descriptors (1 octet)
L2 Bundle Member Link Local Identifiers (4   Number of L2 Bundle Member Descriptors octets)
An L2 Bundle Member Descriptor is a Link Local Identifier as defined in [RFC4202].
A sub TLV may define an attribute common to all of the bundle members listed, or it may define an attribute unique to each bundle member.
Use of these two classes of sub TLVs is described in the following sections.
Only one Parent L3 Neighbor Descriptor is present in a given TLV.
Multiple L2 Bundle Attribute Descriptors may be present in a single TLV.
Parallel L3 Adjacencies When there exist multiple L3 adjacencies to the same neighbor, additional information is required to uniquely identify the L3 Neighbor.
(sub TLV 6 defined in [RFC5305])
(sub TLV 12 defined in [RFC6119])
Link Local/Remote Identifiers (sub TLV 4 defined in [RFC5307])
When the P Flag is set in the flags field in the Parent L3 Neighbor Descriptor, one and only one of the above sub
The chosen sub TLV MUST immediately follow the flags field described in Section 3.
These sub TLVs MAY be omitted if no parallel adjacencies to the neighbor exist.
These sub TLVs advertise a single copy of an attribute (e.g., link bandwidth).
The attribute applies to all of the L2 Bundle Members in the set advertised under the preceding L2 Bundle Member Attribute Descriptor.
No more than one copy of a given sub TLV in this category may appear in the set of sub TLVs under the preceding L2 Bundle Member Attribute Descriptor.
If multiple copies of a given sub TLV are present, all copies MUST be ignored.
The set of L2 Bundle Member Descriptors that may be advertised under a single L2 Bundle Member Attribute Descriptor is therefore limited to bundle members that share the set of attributes advertised in the shared attribute sub TLVs.
All existing sub TLVs defined in the IANA registry for Sub TLVs for TLVs 22, 23, 141, 222, and 223 are in the category of shared attribute sub TLVs unless otherwise specified in this document.
Bundle Member Adj SIDs [RFC8667] defines sub TLVs to advertise Adj SIDs for L3 adjacencies.
However, these sub TLVs only support the advertisement of a single Adj SID.
As it is expected that each L2 Bundle Member will have unique Adj SIDs in many deployments, it is desirable to define a new sub TLV that allows more efficient encoding of a set of Adj SIDs in a single sub TLV.
Two new sub TLVs are therefore introduced to support advertising Adj SIDs for L2 Bundle Members.
The format of the new sub TLVs is similar to that used for L3 adjacencies, but it is optimized to allow advertisement of a set of Adj SIDs (one per L2 Bundle Member) in a single sub TLV.
The two new sub TLVs defined in the following sections do not fall into the category of shared attribute sub TLVs.
L2 Bundle Member Adjacency Segment Identifier Sub TLV
This sub TLV is used to advertise Adj SIDs for L2 Bundle Members associated with a parent L3 adjacency that is point to point.
The following format is defined for this sub
Flags:  1 octet field of the following flags: 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7    F
where: F Flag:  Address Family Flag.
If unset, then the Adj SID refers to an L2 Bundle Member with outgoing IPv4 encapsulation.
If set, then the Adj SID refers to an L2 Bundle Member with outgoing IPv6 encapsulation.
If set, then the Adj SID carries a value.
By default, the flag is SET.
If set, then the value/index carried by the Adj SID has local significance.
By default, the flag is SET.
When set, the S Flag indicates that the Adj SID refers to a set of L2 Bundle Members (and therefore MAY be assigned to other L2 Bundle Members as well).
When set, the P Flag indicates that the Adj SID is persistently allocated, i.e., the Adj  SID value remains consistent across router restart and/or interface flap.
MUST be zero when originated and ignored when received.
The flags are deliberately kept congruent to the flags in the L3 ADJ SID defined in [RFC8667].
indicates a flag used in the L3 Adj SID sub TLV, but one that is NOT used in this sub TLV.
These bits SHOULD be sent as 0 and MUST be ignored on receipt.
The value represents the weight of the Adj SID for the purpose of load balancing.
The use of the weight is defined in [RFC8402].
Flags and weight are shared by all L2 Bundle Members listed in the L2 Bundle Attribute Descriptor.
SID Descriptors: There MUST be one descriptor for each of the L2 Bundle Members advertised under the preceding L2 Bundle Member Attribute Descriptor.
Each descriptor consists of one of the following fields:
According to the V  and L Flags, it contains either:  A 3 octet local label where the 20 rightmost bits are used for encoding the label value.
In this case, the V  and L Flags MUST be set.
A 4 octet index defining the offset in the SID/Label space advertised by this router.
In this case, V  and L Flags MUST be unset.
L2 Bundle Member LAN Adjacency
This sub TLV is used to advertise Adj SIDs for L2 Bundle Members associated with a parent L3 adjacency that is a LAN adjacency.
In LAN subnetworks, the Designated Intermediate System (DIS) is elected and originates the Pseudonode LSP (PN LSP) including all neighbors of the DIS.
When Segment Routing is used, each router in the LAN MAY advertise the Adj SID of each of its neighbors on the LAN.
Similarly, for each L2 Bundle Member, a router MAY advertise an Adj  SID to each neighbor on the LAN.
The following format is defined for this sub
Neighbor System ID:  6 octets
Flags:  1 octet field of the following flags: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
where: F Flag:  Address Family Flag.
If unset, then the Adj SID refers to an L2 Bundle Member with outgoing IPv4 encapsulation.
If set, then the Adj SID refers to an L2 Bundle Member with outgoing IPv6 encapsulation.
If set, then the Adj SID carries a value.
By default, the flag is SET.
If set, then the value/index carried by the Adj SID has local significance.
By default, the flag is SET.
When set, the S Flag indicates that the Adj SID refers to a set of L2 Bundle Members (and therefore MAY be assigned to other L2 Bundle Members as well).
When set, the P Flag indicates that the Adj SID is persistently allocated, i.e., the Adj  SID value remains consistent across router restart and/or interface flap.
MUST be zero when originated and ignored when received.
The flags are deliberately kept congruent to the flags in the L3
These bits SHOULD be sent as 0 and MUST be ignored on receipt.
The value represents the weight of the Adj SID for the purpose of load balancing.
The use of the weight is defined in [RFC8402].
Flags and weight are shared by all L2 Bundle Members listed in the L2 Bundle Attribute Descriptor.
L2 Bundle Member LAN Adjacency
SID Descriptors: There MUST be one descriptor for each of the L2 Bundle Members advertised under the preceding L2 Bundle Member Attribute Descriptor.
Each descriptor consists of one of the following fields:
According to the V  and L Flags, it contains either:  A 3 octet local label where the 20 rightmost bits are used for encoding the label value.
In this case, the V  and L Flags MUST be set.
A 4 octet index defining the offset in the SID/Label space advertised by this router.
In this case, V  and L Flags MUST be unset.
This document adds the following new TLV to the IS IS "TLV Codepoints Registry".
The name of the IANA registry for Sub TLVs for TLVs 22, 23, 141, 222, and 223 has been changed to include sub TLV 25.
An additional column has been added to the registry to indicate which sub TLVs may appear in the new L2 Bundle Member Attributes TLV.
The column for TLV 25 has one of the following three values:
sub TLV may appear in TLV 25 and MAY be shared by multiple L2 Bundle Members n
MUST NOT appear in TLV 25
The following table indicates the appropriate settings for all currently defined sub TLVs with regard to their use in the new L2 Bundle Member Attributes TLV.
Unconstrained TE LSP Count (sub )
This document adds the following new sub TLVs to the above registry.
The IS IS protocol has supported the advertisement of link attribute information, including link identifiers, for many years.
The advertisements defined in this document are identical to existing advertisements defined in [RFC4202], [RFC5305], [RFC8570], and [RFC8667], but are associated with L2 links that are part of a bundle interface on which the IS IS protocol operates.
There are therefore no new security issues introduced by the extensions in this document.
As always, if the protocol is used in an environment where unauthorized access to the physical links on which IS IS Protocol Data Units (PDUs) are sent occurs, then attacks are possible.
The use of authentication as defined in [RFC5304] and [RFC5310] is recommended to prevent such attacks.
Appendix A.  Example Encoding Below is an example encoding of L2 Bundle advertisements in a case where we have two parallel adjacencies to the same neighbor whose system id is 1234.1234.1234.00.
The two L2 bundles have the following sets of attributes: L3 Adjacency
#1 L3 IPv4 local link address:
192.0.2.1 Four bundle members with the following attributes:
#2 L3 IPv4 local link address:
Three bundle members with the following attributes:
This requires two TLVs, one for each L3 adjacency.
Neighbor System ID octets 1 4
Local Label Bundle Member #2: 0x11112
Neighbor System ID octets 1 4
Link Local Identifier Bundle Member #2: 0x22222222
Link Local Identifier Bundle Member #3: 0x22223333
Local Label Bundle Member #2
Local Label Bundle Member #3: 0x22223
The following people gave a substantial contribution to the content of this document and should be considered coauthors:
Stefano Previdi Huawei Technologies Italy Email: stefano@previdi.net
