Abstract This memorandum describes a set of MIME types for use with the ISO Interlibrary Loan Protocol (ISO 10160/10161).
Two MIME types are specified below.
The first is a media type to carry objects which are  BER [BER] encoded ISO ILL Protocol Data Units (PDU's).
BER are the basic Encoding Rules used to encode  PDU's which have been described using ASN.1 (Abstract Syntax Notation 1)
The second is for use with the associated document delivery instructions.
Document Delivery Instructions (DDI) is an emerging protocol which enables automatic electronic delivery of items.
It allows a request management system (which might have received a request for an item via the ISO Interlibrary Loan Protocol (ISO 10160/10161))  to pass details of the request, item, and delivery, to a delivery module, and to receive back reports on the delivery process or arrival of an item.
It is currently being submitted to the ISO TC46/SC4/WG4 committee for approval as an ISO standard.
Registration Information Media type name:
application Media subtype name:  iso 10161
ill 1 for BER encoded ISO ILL APDU's Media type name:  application Media subtype name:  ill ddi For associated Document Delivery Instructions Required Parameter:  transfer encoding For BER
encoded PDU's or DDI's, the only current legal value of this parameter is: iso
The transfer encoding parameter describes the way the PDU has been encoded before being submitted to the transport service (in this case MIME/RFC822).
The two protocols described in this RFC specify their APDU's using ASN.1 (ISO 8824:1990) and the most common way of encoding ASN.1 packets is to use the Basic Encoding Rules (BER ISO 8825)
The parameter is included to allow future use of these MIME types with other encoding schemes.
As an example, the ISO 10161 standard also describes an encoding method using EDIFACT.
In the future, other schemes might also be employed.
(Since the EDIFACT encoding is not currently in use amongst the ISO 10161 and DDI communities, a value for the transfer encoding parameter to describe it is not being registered in this RFC.)
iso 10161 apdu type Valid values are: ILL Request Forward Notification
Shipped ILL Answer Conditional Reply
Cancel Cancel Reply Received Recall
In Overdue Renew Renew Answer Lost Damaged Message Status Query Status Or Error Report Expired This parameter is optional and can be provided for informational or diagnostic purposes.
The value of the PDU or DDI type can be determined from the actual data sent.
The use and format of the PDU's and DDI's is defined in the relevant protocol documents which describe them.
Examples Content Type: application/iso 10161 ill 1;
transfer encoding iso  8825 ber; iso 10161 apdu type Recall; Content Type: application/ill ddi;  transfer encoding iso 8825 ber; Encoding Since BER encoded material is binary in nature, some form of encoding is needed when 7bit or 8bit transport mechanisms are employed.
The recommended  encoding for BER encoded
PDU's  is Base64 PDU's per Message
When used to send BER encoded PDU's or DDI's.
Each MIME body part will carry at most one BER encoded PDU or DDI.
However, a single MIME message containing multiple body parts can be used to transport more than one BER PDU and or DDI.
There are no known security risks associated with transmitting BER encoded PDU's in general.
However, a particular BER encoded PDU or DDI may have security considerations that make it inappropriate for transmittal through public data networks unless appropriate protection mechanisms, like encryption, are used.
Such a situation might occur, for example, when organizations are exchanging documents that contain secure or classified information
and it is necessary to keep information about both the material being exchanged and the exchanging partners confidential.
Interoperability Considerations BER is an international standard for encoding data meant to be transferred between two systems that may store data in different local formats internally [BER].
The National Library of Canada has been designated the maintenance agency for the ISO ILL protocol.
For more information on this MIME type contact: Barbara Shuh Library Network Specialist Information Analysis and Standards Information and Technology Services National Library of Canada 395 Wellington Street Ottawa, Ontario CANADA K1A 0N4 Phone: (819) 994 6969
