Abstract This document specifies a DHCPv6 option that is meant to be used by a Dual Stack Lite Basic Bridging BroadBand (B4) element to discover the IPv6 address of its corresponding Address Family Transition Router (AFTR).
Dual Stack Lite [RFC6333] is a solution to offer both IPv4 and IPv6 connectivity to customers that are addressed only with an IPv6 prefix (no IPv4 address is assigned to the attachment device).
One of its key components is an IPv4 over IPv6 tunnel, commonly referred to as a softwire.
A DS Lite "Basic Bridging BroadBand" (B4) device will not know if the network it is attached to offers Dual Stack Lite service, and if it did would not know the remote endpoint of the tunnel to establish a softwire.
To inform the B4 of the Address Family Transition Router's (AFTR) location, a DNS [RFC1035] hostname may be used.
Once this information is conveyed, the presence of the configuration indicating the AFTR's location also informs a host to initiate Dual Stack Lite (DS Lite) service and become a softwire initiator.
To provide the conveyance of the configuration information, a single DHCPv6 [RFC3315] option is used, expressing the AFTR's Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) to the B4 element.
The details of how the B4 establishes an IPv4 in IPv6 softwire to the AFTR are out of scope for this document.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
The AFTR Name DHCPv6 Option
The AFTR Name option consists of option code and option len fields (as all DHCPv6 options have), and a variable length tunnel endpoint  name field containing a fully qualified domain name that refers to the AFTR to which the client MAY connect.
The AFTR Name option SHOULD NOT appear in any DHCPv6 messages other than the following: Solicit, Advertise, Request, Renew, Rebind, Information Request, and Reply.
The format of the AFTR Name option is shown in the following figure:
OPTION AFTR NAME: 64 option len:
Length of the tunnel endpoint name field in octets.
A fully qualified domain name of the AFTR tunnel endpoint.
The tunnel endpoint name field is formatted as required in DHCPv6
[RFC3315] Section 8 ("Representation and Use of Domain Names").
Briefly, the format described is using a single octet noting the length of one DNS label (limited to at most 63 octets), followed by the label contents.
This repeats until all labels in the FQDN are exhausted, including a terminating zero length label.
Any updates to Section 8 of DHCPv6
[RFC3315] also apply to encoding of this field.
An example format for this option is shown in Figure 2, which conveys the FQDN "aftr.example.com.".
: Example tunnel endpoint name Note that in the specific case of the example tunnel endpoint name (Figure 2), the length of the tunnel endpoint name is 18 octets, and so an option len field value of 18 would be used.
The option is validated by confirming that all of the following conditions are met: 1.
the option len is greater than 3; 2.
the option len is less than or equal to the remaining number of octets in the DHCPv6 packet; 3.
the individual label lengths do not exceed the option length;
the tunnel endpoint name is of valid format as described in DHCPv6 Section 8 [RFC3315]; 5.
there are no compression tags; 6.
there is at least one label of nonzero length.
Server Behavior A DHCPv6 server SHOULD NOT send more than one AFTR Name option.
It SHOULD NOT permit the configuration of multiple names within one AFTR Name option.
Both of these conditions are handled as exceptions by the client, so an operator using software that does not perform these validations should be careful not to configure multiple domain names.
[RFC3315] describes how a DHCPv6 client and server negotiate configuration values using the Option Request option (OPTION ORO).
As a convenience to the reader, we mention here that a server will not reply with an AFTR Name option if the client has not explicitly enumerated it on its Option Request option.
A client that supports the B4 functionality of DS Lite (defined in [RFC6333])
and conforms to this specification MUST include OPTION AFTR NAME on its OPTION ORO.
Because it requires a DNS name for address resolution, the client MAY also wish to include the OPTION DNS SERVERS [RFC3646] option on its OPTION ORO.
If the client receives the AFTR Name option, it MUST verify the option contents as described in Section 3.
Note that in different environments, the B4 element and DHCPv6 client may be integrated, joined, or separated by a third piece of software.
For the purpose of this specification, we refer to the "B4 system" when specifying implementation steps that may be processed at any stage of integration between the DHCPv6 client software and the B4 element it is configuring.
If the B4 system receives more than one AFTR Name option, it MUST use only the first instance of that option.
If the AFTR Name option contains more than one FQDN, as distinguished by the presence of multiple root labels, the B4 system MUST use only the first FQDN listed in the configuration.
The B4 system performs standard DNS resolution using the provided FQDN to resolve a AAAA Resource Record, as defined in [RFC3596] and STD 13 ([RFC1034], [RFC1035]).
If any DNS response contains more than one IPv6 address, the B4 system picks only one IPv6 address and uses it as a remote tunnel endpoint for the interface being configured in the current message exchange.
The B4 system MUST NOT establish more than one DS Lite tunnel at the same time per interface.
For a redundancy and high  availability discussion, see Appendix A.3 ("High Availability") of [RFC6333].
Note that a B4 system may have multiple network interfaces, and these interfaces may be configured differently; some may be connected to networks that call for DS Lite, and some may be connected to networks that are using normal dual stack or other means.
The B4 system should approach this specification on an interface by interface basis.
For example, if the B4 system is attached to multiple networks that provide the AFTR Name option, then the B4 system MUST configure a tunnel for each interface separately, as each DS Lite tunnel provides IPv4 connectivity for each distinct interface.
Means to bind an AFTR Name and DS Lite tunnel configuration to a given interface in a multiple interface device are out of scope of this document.
This document does not present any new security issues, but as with all DHCPv6 derived configuration state, it is completely possible that the configuration is being delivered by a third party (Man in the Middle).
As such, there is no basis for trusting the access level represented by the DS Lite softwire connection, and DS Lite should therefore not bypass any security mechanisms such as IP firewalls.
[RFC3315] discusses DHCPv6 related security issues.
[RFC6333] discusses DS Lite related security issues.
IANA Considerations IANA has allocated a single DHCPv6 option code, 64, referencing this document, delineating OPTION AFTR NAME.
