Abstract The Point to Point Protocol (PPP) [1] provides a standard method for transporting multi protocol datagrams over point to point links.
This document describes the use of PPP over Synchronous Optical Network (SONET) and Synchronous Digital Heirarchy (SDH) circuits.
This document is the product of the Point to Point Protocol Working Group of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
Comments should be submitted to the ietf ppp@merit.edu mailing list.
Applicability This specification is intended for those implementations which desire to use the PPP encapsulation over high speed private point to point links, such as intra campus single mode fiber which may already be installed and unused.
Because the PPP encapsulation has relatively low overhead, it is anticipated that significantly higher throughput can be attained compared to other SONET/SDH payload mappings, at a significantly lower cost for line termination equipment.
Introduction PPP was designed as a standard method of communicating over point  to point links.
Initial deployment has been over short local lines, leased lines, and plain old telephone service (POTS) using modems.
As new packet services and higher speed lines are introduced, PPP is easily deployed in these environments as well.
This specification is primarily concerned with the use of the PPP encapsulation over SONET/SDH links.
Since SONET/SDH is by definition a point to point circuit, PPP is well suited to use over these links.
The Synchronous Optical Network (SONET) [3] is an octet synchronous multiplex scheme that defines a family of standard rates and formats.
Despite the name, it is not limited to optical links.
Electrical specifications have been defined for single mode fiber, multi mode fiber, and CATV 75 ohm coaxial cable.
The transmission rates are integral multiples of 51.840 Mbps, which may be used to carry T3/E3 bit synchronous signals.
The CCITT Synchronous Digital Heirarchy (SDH) defines a subset of SONET transmission rates beginning at 155.520 Mbps [5].
Physical Layer Requirements PPP treats SONET/SDH transport as octet oriented synchronous links.
SONET/SDH links are full duplex by definition.
Interface Format PPP presents an octet interface to the physical layer.
There is no provision for sub octets to be supplied or accepted.
The octet stream is mapped into the SONET/SDH Synchronous Payload Envelope (SPE), with the octet boundaries aligned with the SPE octet boundaries.
No scrambling is needed during insertion into the SPE.
The Path Signal Label (C2) is intended to indicate the contents of the SPE.
The experimental value of 207 (cf hex) is used to indicate PPP.
The Multiframe Indicator (H4) is currently unused, and MUST be zero.
The basic rate for PPP over SONET/SDH is that of STS 3c/STM 1 at 155.520 Mbps.
The available information bandwidth is 149.760 Mbps, which is the STS 3c/STM 1 SPE with section, line and path overhead removed.
This is the same super rate mapping that is used for ATM and FDDI [4].
Lower signal rates MUST use the Virtual Tributary (VT) mechanism of SONET/SDH.
This maps existing signals up to T3/E3 rates asynchronously into the SPE, or uses available clocks for bit  synchronous and byte synchronous mapping.
Higher signal rates SHOULD conform to the SDH STM series, rather than the SONET STS series, as equipment becomes available.
The STM series progresses in powers of 4 (instead of 3), and employs fewer steps, which is likely to simplify multiplexing and integration.
Control Signals PPP does not require the use of control signals.
When available, using such signals can allow greater functionality and performance.
Implications are discussed in [2].
The framing for octet synchronous links is described in "PPP in HDLC Framing" [2].
The PPP frames are located by row within the SPE payload.
Because frames are variable in length, the frames are allowed to cross SPE boundaries.
The standard LCP sync configuration defaults apply to SONET/SDH links.
The following Configuration Options are recommended:
No Address and Control Field Compression
Protocol Field Compression 32 bit FCS Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
Chair's Address The working group can be contacted via the current chair: Fred Baker Advanced Computer Communications 315 Bollay Drive Santa Barbara, California
