Field Names for E Commerce IESG Note
This document is the output of a vendor consortium, and is not the output of an IETF Working Group.
Implementors of this specification are warned that this data model is heavily biased toward conventions used in the United States, and the English language.
As such it is unlikely to be suitable for international or multilingual use in the global Internet.
Abstract Customers are frequently required to enter substantial amounts of information at an Internet merchant site in order to complete a purchase or other transaction, especially the first time they go there.
A standard set of information fields is defined as the first version of an Electronic Commerce Modeling Language (ECML) so that this task can be more easily automated, for example by wallet software that could fill in fields.
Even for the manual data entry case, customers will be less confused by varying merchant sites if a substantial number adopt these standard fields.
Introduction 1.1 Background Today, numerous merchants are successfully conducting business on the Internet using HTML based forms.
The data formats used in these forms varies considerably from one merchant to another.
End users find the diversity confusing and the process of manually filling in these forms to be tedious.
The result is that many merchant forms, reportedly around two thirds, are abandoned during the fill in process.
Software tools called electronic wallets can help this situation.
A digital wallet is an application or service that assists consumers in conducting online transactions by allowing them to store billing, shipping, payment, and preference information and to use this information to automatically complete merchant interactions.
This greatly simplifies the check out process and minimizes the need for a consumer to complete a merchant's form every time.
Digital wallets that fill forms have been successfully built into browsers, as helper applications to browsers, as stand alone applications, as browser plug ins, and as server based applications.
But the proliferation of electronic wallets has been hampered by the lack of standards.
ECML (Electronic Commerce Modeling Language, <www.ecml.org>)
Version 1 provides a set of simple guidelines for web merchants that will enable electronic wallets from multiple vendors to fill in their web forms.
The end result is that more consumers will find shopping on the web to be easy and compelling.
The set of fields documented herein was developed by the Wallet/Merchant Standards Alliance (www.ecml.org) which now includes, in alphabetic order, the following: American Express (www.americanexpress.com)
The fields are derived from and consistent with the W3C P3P base data schema at <
1.2 Relationship to Other Standards ECML Version 1 is not a replacement or alternative to SSL/TLS [RFC 2246], SET [SET], XML [XML], or IOTP [IOTP].
These are important standards that provide functionality such as non repudiatable transactions, automatable payment scheme selection, and smart card support.
ECML may be used with any payment mechanism.
It simply allows a merchant to publish consistent simple web forms.
Multiple wallets and multiple merchants plan to interoperably support ECML.
This is an open standard.
ECML is designed to be simple.
Version 1 of the project adds no new technology to the web.
A merchant can adopt ECML and gain the support of these multiple Wallets by making very simple changes to the HTML pages that they currently use to support their customers.
Use of ECML requires no license.
1.3 Areas Deferred to Future Versions Standardization of information fields transmitted from the merchant to the consumer, considerations for business purchasing cards, non  card payment mechanisms, wallet activation, privacy related mechanisms, additional payment mechanisms, and any sort of "negotiation" were among the areas deferred to consideration in future versions.
Hidden or other special fields were minimized.
The primary target was North American consumer to merchant electronic commerce.
Using The Fields To conform to this document, the field names shall be as listed in section 3 below.
Note: this does not impose any restriction on the user visible labeling of fields, just on their names as used in communication with the merchant.
2.1 Presentation of the Fields There is no necessary implication as to the order or manner of presentation.
Some merchants may wish to ask for more information, some less by omitting fields.
Some merchants may ask for the information they want in one HTML form on one web page, others may ask for parts of the information at different times on different pages.
For example, it is common to ask for "ship to" information earlier, so shipping cost can be computed, before the payment method information.
Some merchants may require that all the information they request be provided while other make much information optional, etc.
There is no way with version 1 of ECML to indicate what fields the merchant considers mandatory.
From the point of view of customer software, all fields are optional to complete.
However, the merchant may give an error or re present a request for information if some field it requires is not completed, just as it may
if a field is completed in a manner it considers erroneous.
2.2 Methods and Flow of Setting the Fields There are a variety of methods of communication possible between the customer and the merchant by which the merchant can indicate what fields they want that the consumer can provide.
Probably the easiest to use for currently deployed software is as fields in an HTML [HTML4.0] form.
Other possibilities are to use the W3C P3P protocol or the IOTP Authenticate transaction [IOTP].
User action or the appearance of the Ecom SchemaVersion field are examples of triggers that could be used to initiate a facility capable of filling in fields.
It is required that the Ecom SchemaVersion field, which is usually a hidden field, be included on every web page that has any "Ecom " fields.
Because web pages can load very slowly, it may not be clear to an automated field fill in function when it is finished filling in fields on a web page.
For this reason, it is recommended that the Ecom SchemaVersion field be the last "Ecom " field on a web page.
Merchant requests for information can extend over several web pages.
Without further provision, a facility could either require re  starting on each page or possibly violate or appear to violate privacy by continuing to fill in fields for pages beyond with end of the transaction with a particular merchant.
For this reason the Ecom TransactionComplete field, which is normally hidden, is provided.
It is recommended that it appear on the last web page involved in a transaction, just before an Ecom SchemaVersion field, so that multi web page automated field fill in logic could know when to stop if it chooses to check for this field.
An example in HTML might be as follows: <HTML> <HEAD>
> eCom Fields Example </title> </HEAD> <BODY> <FORM action "http://ecom.example.com" method "POST"
Your name on the card <INPUT type "text" name "Ecom Payment Card Name" SIZE 40
The card number <INPUT type "text" name "Ecom Payment Card Number" SIZE 19
<INPUT type "text" name "Ecom Payment Card ExpDate Month" SIZE 2
> <INPUT type "text" name "Ecom Payment Card ExpDate Year" SIZE 4
> <INPUT type "hidden" name "Ecom Payment Card Protocol"
> <INPUT type "hidden" name "Ecom SchemaVersion" value "http://www.ecml.org/version/1.0"
After all of the pages are submitted, the merchant will reply with a confirmation page informing both the user and the wallet that the transaction is complete.
> Thank you for your order.
It will be shipped in several days.
<INPUT type "hidden" name "Ecom TransactionComplete"
> <INPUT type "hidden" name "Ecom SchemaVersion" value "http://www.ecml.org/version/1.0"
The fields are listed below along with the minimum data entry size to allow.
Appropriate consumer to merchant transmission mechanisms may use this to request and send aggregates, such as Ecom Payment Card ExpDate to encompass all the date components or Ecom ShipTo to encompass all the ship to components that the consumer is willing to provide.
The marshalling and unmarshalling of the components of such aggregates depends on the data transfer protocol used.
MIN" in the table below is the MINIMUM DATA SIZE TO ALLOW FOR ON DATA ENTRY.
It is NOT the minimum size for valid contents of the field and merchant software should, in most cases, be prepared to receive a longer or shorter value.
Merchant dealing with areas where, for example, the state/province name or phone number is longer than the "Min" given below must obviously permit longer data entry.
In some cases, however, there is a maximum size that makes sense and where this is the case, it is documented in a Note for the field.
Ecom ShipTo Postal Name Prefix
4  ( 1) ship to first name
15  ( 2) ship to last name
20  ( 4) ship to street line2
Line2    20  ( 4) ship to street line3
Ecom ShipTo Postal Street Line3
Ecom ShipTo Telecom Phone Number
( 8) ship to email
15  ( 2) bill to last name
20  ( 4) bill to street
Line2    20  ( 4) bill to street line3
Ecom BillTo Postal Street Line3
( 5) bill to zip/postal code
14  ( 6) bill to country
2  ( 7) bill to phone
Ecom BillTo Telecom Phone Number
( 8) bill to email
( 1) receiptTo first name
First   15 receiptTo middle name
Last    15 receiptTo name suffix
ReceiptTo Postal Name Suffix   4
( 3) receiptTo street line1
( 4) receiptTo street line3   Ecom ReceiptTo Postal Street Line3
2  ( 5) receiptTo postal code
Ecom ReceiptTo Telecom Phone Number 10
40  ( 9) name on card
(13) card expire date day
(14) card expire date month
Ecom Payment Card ExpDate Month
(15) card expire date year
MIN" in the table above is the MINIMUM DATA SIZE TO ALLOW FOR ON DATA ENTRY.
It is NOT the minimum size for valid contents of the field and merchant software should, in most cases, be prepared to receive a longer or shorter value.
Merchant dealing with areas where, for example, the state/province name or phone number is longer than the "Min" given below must obviously permit longer data entry.
In some cases, however, there is a maximum size that makes sense and this is documented in a Note for the field.
For example: Mr., Mrs., Ms., Dr. This field is commonly not used.
( 2) May also be used for middle initial ( 3)
For example: Ph.D., Jr. (Junior), 3rd, Esq.
This field is commonly not used.
( 4) Address lines must be filled in the order line1, then line2, last line3.
( 5) 2 characters are the minimum for the US and Canada, other countries may require longer fields.
For the US use 2 character US Postal state abbreviation.
( 6) Minimum field lengths for Postal Code will vary based on international market served.
Use 5 character or 5 4 ZIP for the US and 6 character postal code for Canada.
The size given, 14, is believed to be the maximum required anywhere in the world.
( 7) Use [ISO 3166] standard two letter codes <http://www.din.de/gremien/nas/nabd/iso3166ma/codlstp1.html> for country names.
( 8) 10 digits are the minimum for numbers local to the North American Numbering Plan (<http://www.nanpa.com
>: US, Canada and a number of smaller Caribbean and Pacific nations (but not Cuba)), other countries may require longer fields.
Telephone numbers are complicated by differing international access codes, variant punctuation of area/city codes within countries, confusion caused by the fact that the international access code in the NANP region is usually the same as the "country code" for that area (1), etc.
It will probably be necessary to use heuristics or human examination based on the telephone number and addresses given to figure out how to actually call a customer.
It is recommend that an "x" be placed before extension numbers.
The name of the cardholder.
(11) Use the first 4 letters of the association name: American Express AMER; Diners Club DINE; Discover DISC; JCB JCB; Mastercard MAST; Visa VISA.
(12) Includes the check digit at end but no spaces or hyphens [ISO 7812].
The Min given, 19, is the longest number permitted under the ISO standard.
An additional cardholder verification number printed on the card (but not embossed or recorded on the magnetic stripe) such as American Express' CIV, MasterCard's CVC2, and Visa's CVV2 values.
The day of the month.
The month of the year.
Jan 1, Feb 2, March 3, etc.
; Values: 1 12 (16)
A space separated list of protocols available in connection with the specified card.
Initial list of case insensitive tokens: none, set, & setcert.
"Set" indicates usable with SET protocol (i.e., is in a SET wallet) but does not have a SET certificate.
Setcert" indicates same but does have a set certificate.
"None" indicates that automatic field fill is operating but there is no SET wallet or the card is not entered in any SET wallet.
A unique order ID generated by the consumer software.
(19) URI indicating version of this set of fields.
Equal to "http://www.ecml.org/version/1.0" for this version.
A flag to indicate that this web page/aggregate is the final one for this transaction.
The information called for by many of these fields is sensitive and should be protected if being sent over the public Internet or through other channels where it can be observed.
Mechanisms for such protection are not specified herein but channel encryption such as SSL/TLS [RFC 2246] or IPSec [RFC 2411] would be appropriate in many cases.
User control over release of such information is needed to protect the user's privacy.
Any multi web page or other multi aggregate field fill in or data provision mechanism should check for the Ecom TransactionComplete field and cease automated fill when it is encountered until fill is further authorized.
