This RFC is the official specification of the Hostname Server Protocol.
This edition of the specification includes minor revisions to RFC 811 which brings it up to date.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
The NIC Internet Hostname Server is a TCP based host information program and protocol running on the SRI NIC machine.
It is one of a series of internet name services maintained by the DDN Network Information Center (NIC) at SRI International on behalf of the Defense Communications Agency (DCA).
The function of this particular server is to deliver machine readable name/address information describing networks, gateways, hosts, and eventually domains, within the internet environment.
As currently implemented, the server provides the information outlined in the DoD Internet Host Table Specification [See RFC 952].
For a discussion of future developments see also RFC 921 concerning the Domain Name System.
PROTOCOL To access this server from a program, establish a TCP connection to port 101 (decimal) at the service host, SRI NIC.ARPA (26.0.0.73 or 10.0.0.51).
Send the information request (a single line), and read the resulting response.
The connection is closed by the server upon completion of the response, so only one request can be made for each connection.
The name server accepts simple text query requests of the form <command key
The command key is a keyword indicating the nature of the request.
The defined keys are explained below.
The response, on the other hand, is of the form <response key
Care should be taken to interpret the nature of the reply (e.g, single record or multiple record), so that no confusion about the state of the reply results.
An "ALL" request will likely return several hundred or more records of all types, whereas "HNAME" or "HADDR" will usually return one HOST record.
The currently defined command keywords are listed below.
Because the server and the features available will evolve with time, the HELP command should be used to obtain the most recent summary of implemented features, changes, or new commands.
"VERSION: <string>" where <string> will be different for each version of the host table.
HNAME <hostname> One or more matching host table entries.
HADDR <hostaddr> One or more matching host table entries.
ALL OLD   The entire host table without domain style names.
The entire top level domain table (domains only).
ALL DOM   Both the entire domain table and the host table.
ALL INGWAY All known gateways in TENEX/
Remember that the server accepts only a single command line and returns only a single response before closing the connection.
Note, however, that the returned version string is only guaranteed to be unique to each version, and nothing should currently be assumed about its format.
More keywords will be added as new needs are recognized.
A more detailed description of the allowed requests/responses follows.
Given a name, find the entry or entries that match the name.
For example: HNAME SRI NIC.ARPA <CRLF>
where <CRLF> is a carriage return/ linefeed, and 'SRI NIC.ARPA' is a host name
The likely response is: HOST : 26.0.0.73, 10.0.0.51 : SRI NIC.ARPA,SRI NIC,NIC : DEC 2060 :
A response may stretch across more than one line.
Continuation lines always begin with at least one space.
HADDR Query Given an internet address (as specified in RFC 796)
find the entry or entries that match that address.
For example: HADDR 26.0.0.73 <CRLF>
where <CRLF> is a carriage return/ linefeed, and '26.0.0.73' is a host address.
The likely response is the same as for the previous HNAME request.
ALL Query Deliver the entire internet host table in a machine readable form.
where <CRLF> is a carriage return
ERROR HANDLING ERR Reply may occur on any query, and should be permitted in any access program using the name server.
Errors are of the form ERR : <code> :
<string> : as in ERR :
Name not found : The error code is a unique descriptor, limited to 8 characters in length for any given error.
It may be used by the access program to identify the error and, in some cases, to handle it automatically.
The string is an accompanying message for a given error for that case where the access program simply logs the error message.
Current codes and their associated interpretations are NAMNFD
Name not found; name not in table
ADRNFD    Address not found; address not in table ILLCOM    Illegal command; command key not recognized TMPSYS    Temporary system failure, try again later REFERENCES 1.
Harrenstien, K., Stahl, M., and Feinler, E., "Official DoD Internet Host Table Specification," RFC 952, DDN Network Information Center, SRI International, October 1985.
Pickens, J., Feinler, E., and Mathis, J., "The NIC Name Server," A Datagram based Information Utility, RFC 756, Network Information Center, SRI International, July 1979. 3.
Postel, J., "Address Mappings," RFC 796, Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Marina del Rey, September 1981.
Postel, J., "Domain Name System Implementation Schedule", RFC 921, Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Marina del Rey, October 1984.
