Abstract This document defines the changes that need to be made to the Domain Name System (DNS) to support hosts running IP version 6 (IPv6).
The changes include a resource record type to store an IPv6 address, a domain to support lookups based on an IPv6 address, and updated definitions of existing query types that return Internet addresses as part of additional section processing.
The extensions are designed to be compatible with existing applications and, in particular, DNS implementations themselves.
Introduction Current support for the storage of Internet addresses in the Domain Name System (DNS)
[1,2] cannot easily be extended to support IPv6 addresses [3] since applications assume that address queries return 32 bit IPv4 addresses only.
To support the storage of IPv6 addresses in the DNS, this document defines the following extensions: A resource record type is defined to map a domain name to an IPv6 address.
A domain is defined to support lookups based on address.
Existing queries that perform additional section processing to locate IPv4 addresses are redefined to perform additional section processing on both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.
The changes are designed to be compatible with existing software.
The existing support for IPv4 addresses is retained.
Transition issues related to the co existence of both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses in the DNS are discussed in [4].
The IP protocol version used for querying resource records is independent of the protocol version of the resource records; e.g., IPv4 transport can be used to query IPv6 records and vice versa.
This document combines RFC 1886 [5] and changes to RFC 1886 made by RFC 3152 [6], obsoleting both.
Changes mainly consist in replacing the IP6.INT domain by IP6.ARPA as defined in RFC 3152.
New resource record definition and domain A record type is defined to store a host's IPv6 address.
A host that has more than one IPv6 address must have more than one such record.
2.1 AAAA record type The AAAA resource record type is a record specific to the Internet class that stores a single IPv6 address.
The IANA assigned value of the type is 28 (decimal).
A 128 bit IPv6 address is encoded in the data portion of an AAAA resource record in network byte order (high order byte first).
2.3 AAAA query An AAAA query for a specified domain name in the Internet class returns all associated AAAA resource records in the answer section of a response.
A type AAAA query does not trigger additional section processing.
2.4 Textual format of AAAA records
The textual representation of the data portion of the AAAA resource record used in a master database file is the textual representation of an IPv6 address as defined in [3].
2.5 IP6.ARPA Domain A special domain is defined to look up a record given an IPv6 address.
The intent of this domain is to provide a way of mapping an IPv6 address to a host name, although it may be used for other purposes as well.
The domain is rooted at IP6.ARPA.
An IPv6 address is represented as a name in the IP6.ARPA domain by a sequence of nibbles separated by dots with the suffix ".IP6.ARPA".
The sequence of nibbles is encoded in reverse order, i.e., the low order nibble is encoded first, followed by the next low order nibble and so on.
Each nibble is represented by a hexadecimal digit.
For example, the reverse lookup domain name corresponding to the address 4321:0:1:2:3:4:567:89ab would be b.a.9.8.7.6.5.0.4.0.0.0.3.0.0.0.2.0.0.0.1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.1.2.3.4.IP6.
Modifications to existing query types
All existing query types that perform type A additional section processing, i.e., name server (NS), location of services (SRV) and mail exchange (MX) query types, must be redefined to perform both type A and type AAAA additional section processing.
These definitions mean that a name server must add any relevant IPv4 addresses and any relevant IPv6 addresses available locally to the additional section of a response when processing any one of the above queries.
Any information obtained from the DNS must be regarded as unsafe unless techniques specified in [7] or [8] are used.
The definitions of the AAAA record type and of the IP6.ARPA domain do not change the model for use of these techniques.
So, this specification is not believed to cause any new security problems, nor to solve any existing ones.
There are no IANA assignments to be performed.
Appendix A: Changes from RFC 1886
The following changes were made from RFC 1886 "DNS Extensions to support IP version 6": Replaced the "IP6.INT" domain by "IP6.ARPA".
Mentioned SRV query types in section 3 "MODIFICATIONS TO EXISTING QUERY TYPES" Added security considerations.
From "work in progress" to RFC 2893
(Transition Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers).
Added reference to RFC 1886, RFC 3152, RFC 2535 and RFC 2845.
Updated document abstract Added table of contents Added full copyright statement
Added IANA considerations section Added Intellectual Property Statement
