Abstract This document defines a new BGP opaque extended community to carry the origination Autonomous System (AS) validation state inside an autonomous system.
Internal BGP (IBGP) speakers that receive this validation state can configure local policies that allow it to influence their decision process.
This document defines a new BGP opaque extended community to carry the origination AS validation state inside an autonomous system.
IBGP speakers that receive this validation state can configure local policies that allow it to influence their decision process.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
Origin Validation State Extended Community
The value of the high order octet of the extended Type field is 0x43, which indicates it is non transitive.
The value of the low order octet of the extended Type field as assigned by IANA is 0x00.
The Reserved field MUST be set to 0 and ignored upon the receipt of this community.
The last octet of the extended community is an unsigned integer that gives the route's validation state [RFC6811].
If the router is configured to support the extensions defined in this document, it SHOULD attach the origin validation state extended community to BGP UPDATE messages sent to IBGP peers by mapping the computed validation state in the last octet of the extended community.
Similarly, a receiving BGP speaker, in the absence of validation state set based on local data, SHOULD derive a validation state from the last octet of the extended community, if present.
An implementation SHOULD NOT send more than one instance of the origin validation state extended community.
However, if more than one instance is received, an implementation MUST disregard all instances other than the one with the numerically greatest validation state value.
If the value received is greater than the largest specified value (2), the implementation MUST apply a strategy similar to attribute discard [RFC7606] by discarding the erroneous community and logging the error for further analysis.
By default, implementations MUST drop the origin validation state extended community if received from an External BGP (EBGP) peer, without processing it further.
Similarly, by default, an implementation SHOULD NOT send the community to EBGP peers.
However, it SHOULD be possible to configure an implementation to send or accept the community when warranted.
An example of a case where the community would reasonably be received from, or sent to, an EBGP peer is when two adjacent ASes are under control of the same administration.
A second example is documented in [SIDR RPKI].
In deployment scenarios in which not all the speakers in an autonomous system are upgraded to support the extensions defined in this document, it is necessary to define policies that match on the origin validation extended community and set another BGP attribute [RFC6811] that influences selection of the best path in the same way that an implementation of this extension would.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the value 0x00, with the name "BGP Origin Validation State Extended Community", in the "Non Transitive Opaque Extended Community Sub Types" registry.
Security Considerations Security considerations such as those described in [RFC4272] continue to apply.
Because this document introduces an extended community that will generally be used to affect route selection, the analysis in Section 4.5 ("Falsification") of [RFC4593] is relevant.
These issues are neither new nor unique to the origin validation extended community.
The security considerations provided in [RFC6811] apply equally to this application of origin validation.
In addition, this document describes a scheme where router A outsources validation to some router B.
If this scheme is used, the participating routers should have the appropriate trust relationship   B should trust A either because they are under the same administrative control or for some other reason (for example, consider [SIDR RPKI]).
The security properties of the TCP connection between the two routers should also be considered.
See Section 5.1 of [RFC7454] for advice regarding protection of the TCP connection.
