The IMAP extension described here assumes a particular means of using IMAP to support disconnected operation.
However, this means of supporting disconnected operation is not yet documented.
Also, there are multiple theories about how best to do disconnected operation in IMAP, and as yet, there is no consensus on which one should be adopted as a standard.
This document is being approved as a Proposed Standard because it does not appear to have technical flaws in itelf.
However, approval of this document as a Proposed Standard should not be considered an IETF endorsement of any particular means of doing disconnected operation in IMAP.
The UIDPLUS extension of the Internet Message Access Protocol [IMAP4] provides a set of features intended to reduce the amount of time and resources used by some client operations.
The features in UIDPLUS are primarily intended for disconnected use clients.
Conventions Used in this Document
In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and server respectively.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as defined in "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" [KEYWORDS].
The UIDPLUS extension is present in any IMAP4 server implementation which returns "UIDPLUS" as one of the supported capabilities to the CAPABILITY command.
The UIDPLUS extension contains one additional command and additional data returned with successful APPEND and COPY commands.
Clients that wish to use the new command in UIDPLUS must of course first test for the presence of the extension by issuing a CAPABILITY command.
Each of the features in UIDPLUS are optimizations; clients can provide the same functionality, albeit more slowly, by using commands in the base protocol.
With each feature, this document recommends a fallback approach to take when the UIDPLUS extension is not supported by the server.
UID EXPUNGE Command Arguments:  message set Data:
OK expunge completed NO expunge failure (e.g. permission denied) BAD command unknown or arguments invalid
The UID EXPUNGE command permanently removes from the currently selected mailbox all messages that both have the \Deleted flag set and have a UID that is included in the specified message set.
If a message either does not have the \Deleted flag set or is has a UID that is not included in the specified message set, it is not affected.
This command may be used to ensure that a replayed EXPUNGE command does not remove any messages that have been marked as \Deleted between the time that the user requested the expunge operation and the time the server processes the command.
If the server does not support the UIDPLUS capability, the client should fall back to using the STORE command to temporarily remove the \Deleted flag from messages it does not want to remove.
The client could alternatively fall back to using the EXPUNGE command, risking the unintended removal of some messages.
A003 UID EXPUNGE 3000:3002 S:
EXPUNGE S:   3 EXPUNGE S:   3 EXPUNGE S:
A003 OK UID EXPUNGE completed 4.2.
Successful APPEND commands return an APPENDUID response code in the tagged OK response.
The APPENDUID response code contains as arguments the UIDVALIDITY of the destination mailbox and the UID assigned to the appended message.
If the server does not support the UIDPLUS capability, the client can only discover this information by selecting the destination mailbox and issuing FETCH commands.
A003 APPEND saved messages (\Seen) {310} C: Date: Mon, 7 Feb 1994 21:52:25  0800
Content Type: TEXT/PLAIN; CHARSET US ASCII C:
Hello Joe, do you think we can meet at 3:30 tomorrow?
Successful COPY and UID COPY commands return a COPYUID response code in the tagged OK response whenever at least one message was copied.
The COPYUID response code contains as an argument the UIDVALIDITY of the appended to mailbox, a message set containing the UIDs of the messages copied to the destination mailbox, in the order they were copied, and a message containing the UIDs assigned to the copied messages, in the order they were assigned.
If the server does not support the UIDPLUS capability, the client can only discover this information by selecting the destination mailbox and issuing FETCH commands.
Done C: A003 UID COPY
The following syntax specification uses the augmented Backus Naur Form (BNF) notation as specified in [RFC 822] as modified by [IMAP4].
Non terminals referenced but not defined below are as defined by [IMAP4].
Except as noted otherwise, all alphabetic characters are case  insensitive.
The use of upper or lower case characters to define token strings is for editorial clarity only.
Implementations MUST accept these strings in a case insensitive fashion.
There are no known security issues with this extension.
