Abstract This document defines a way for a Border Gateway Protocol Link State (BGP LS) speaker to advertise multiple types of supported Maximum SID Depths (MSDs) at node and/or link granularity.
Such advertisements allow entities (e.g., centralized controllers) to determine whether a particular Segment Identifier (SID) stack can be supported in a given network.
When Segment Routing (SR) [RFC8402] paths are computed by a centralized controller, it is critical that the controller learns the Maximum SID Depth (MSD) that can be imposed at each node/link on a given SR path.
This ensures that the Segment Identifier (SID) stack
depth of a computed path doesn't exceed the number of SIDs
the node is capable of imposing.
[RFC8664] defines how to signal MSD in the Path Computation Element Protocol (PCEP).
The OSPF and IS IS
extensions for the signaling of MSD are defined in [RFC8476] and [RFC8491], respectively.
However, if PCEP is not supported/configured on the head end of an SR tunnel or a Binding SID anchor node, and the controller does not participate in IGP routing, it has no way of learning the MSD of nodes and links.
BGP LS [RFC7752] defines a way to expose topology and associated attributes and capabilities of the nodes in that topology to a centralized controller.
This document defines extensions to BGP LS to advertise one or more types of MSDs at node and/or link granularity.
Other types of MSDs are known to be useful.
For example, [OSPF ELC] and [ISIS ELC] define Entropy Readable Label Depth (ERLD), which is used by a head  end to insert an Entropy Label (EL) at a depth that can be read by transit nodes.
In the future, it is expected that new MSD Types will be defined to signal additional capabilities, e.g., ELs, SIDs that can be imposed through recirculation, or SIDs associated with another data plane such as IPv6.
MSD advertisements may be useful even if SR itself is not enabled.
For example, in a non SR MPLS network, MSD defines the maximum label depth.
Conventions Used in This Document 1.1.1.
Terminology MSD:  Maximum SID Depth
the number of SIDs supported by a node or a link on a node PCE:
Path Computation Element Protocol SID:  Segment Identifier as defined in [RFC8402] SR:  Segment Routing Label Imposition:
Imposition is the act of modifying and/or adding labels to the outgoing label stack associated with a packet.
The number of labels imposed is then the sum of the number of labels that are replaced and the number of labels that are pushed.
See [RFC3031] for further details.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
Advertisement of MSD via BGP LS
This document describes extensions that enable BGP LS speakers to signal the MSD capabilities [RFC8491] of nodes and their links in a network to a BGP LS consumer of network topology such as a centralized controller.
The centralized controller can leverage this information in computation of SR paths based on their MSD capabilities.
When a BGP LS speaker is originating the topology learnt via link state routing protocols such as OSPF or IS
IS, the MSD information for the nodes and their links is sourced from the underlying extensions as defined in [RFC8476] and [RFC8491], respectively.
The extensions introduced in this document allow for advertisement of different MSD Types, which are defined elsewhere and were introduced in [RFC8491].
This enables sharing of MSD Types that may be defined in the future by the IGPs in BGP LS.
The Node MSD ([RFC8476] [RFC8491]) is encoded in a new Node Attribute TLV [RFC7752] to carry the provisioned SID depth of the router identified by the corresponding Router ID.
Node MSD is the smallest MSD supported by the node on the set of interfaces configured for use.
MSD values may be learned via a hardware API or may be provisioned.
Where: Type:  266 Length:  variable (multiple of 2); represents the total length of the value field in octets.
consists of one or more pairs of a 1 octet MSD Type and 1 octet MSD Value.
MSD Type:  one of the values defined in the "IGP MSD Types" registry defined in [RFC8491].
MSD Value:  a number in the range of 0 255.
For all MSD Types, 0 represents the lack of ability to impose an MSD stack of any depth; any other value represents that of the node.
This value MUST represent the lowest value supported by any link configured for use by the advertising protocol instance.
The Link MSD ([RFC8476] [RFC8491]) is defined to carry the MSD of the interface associated with the link.
It is encoded in a new Link Attribute TLV [RFC7752] using the following format:
Where: Type:  267 Length:  variable (multiple of 2); represents the total length of the value field in octets.
consists of one or more pairs of a 1 octet MSD Type and 1 octet MSD Value.
MSD Type:  one of the values defined in the "IGP MSD Types" registry defined in [RFC8491].
MSD Value:  a number in the range of 0 255.
For all MSD Types, 0 represents the lack of ability to impose an MSD stack of any depth; any other value represents that of the link when used as an outgoing interface.
IANA Considerations IANA has assigned code points from the registry "BGP LS Node Descriptor, Link Descriptor, Prefix Descriptor, and Attribute TLVs" based on the table below.
BGP LS MSD TLV Code Points 6.
The new protocol extensions introduced in this document augment the existing IGP topology information that is distributed via [RFC7752].
Procedures and protocol extensions defined in this document do not affect the BGP protocol operations and management other than as discussed in Section 6 (Manageability Considerations) of [RFC7752].
Specifically, the malformed attribute tests for syntactic checks in Section 6.2.2 (Fault Management) of [RFC7752] now encompass the new BGP LS Attribute TLVs defined in this document.
The semantic or content checking for the TLVs specified in this document and their association with the BGP LS Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI) types or their BGP LS Attribute is left to the consumer of the BGP LS information (e.g., an application or a controller) and not the BGP protocol.
A consumer of the BGP LS information retrieves this information over a BGP LS session (refer to Sections 1 and 2 of [RFC7752]).
This document only introduces new Attribute TLVs, and any syntactic error in them would result in the BGP LS Attribute being discarded [RFC7752].
The MSD information introduced in BGP LS by this specification, may be used by BGP LS consumer applications like an SR PCE to learn the SR SID stack handling capabilities of the nodes in the topology.
This can enable the SR PCE to perform path computations taking into consideration the size of SID stack that the specific head end node may be able to impose.
Errors in the encoding or decoding of the MSD information may result in the unavailability of such information to the SR PCE, or incorrect information being made available to it.
This may result in the head end node not being able to instantiate the desired SR path in its forwarding and provide the SR based optimization functionality.
The handling of such errors by applications like SR PCE may be implementation specific and out of scope of this document.
The extensions specified in this document do not specify any new configuration or monitoring aspects in BGP or BGP LS.
The specification of BGP models is an ongoing work based on the [BGP MODEL].
The advertisement of an incorrect MSD value may have negative consequences.
If the value is smaller than supported, path computation may fail to compute a viable path.
If the value is larger than supported, an attempt to instantiate a path that can't be supported by the head end (the node performing the SID imposition) may occur.
The presence of this information may also inform an attacker of how to induce any of the aforementioned conditions.
The procedures and protocol extensions defined in this document do not affect the BGP security model.
See the "Security Considerations" Section of [RFC4271] for a discussion of BGP security.
Also, refer to [RFC4272] and [RFC6952] for analyses of security issues for BGP.
Security considerations for acquiring and distributing BGP LS information are discussed in [RFC7752].
The TLVs introduced in this document are used to propagate the MSD IGP extensions defined in [RFC8476] and [RFC8491].
It is assumed that the IGP instances originating these TLVs will support all the required security (as described in [RFC8476] and [RFC8491]) in order to prevent any security issues when propagating the TLVs into BGP LS.
The advertisement of the node and link attribute information defined in this document presents no significant additional risk beyond that associated with the existing node and link attribute information already supported in [RFC7752].
Contributors Siva Sivabalan Cisco Systems Inc. Canada Email: msiva@cisco.com
