Command name and code NAOLFD 16
(Negotiate About Output Linefeed Disposition)
In the following, we are discussing a simplex connection, as described in the NAOL and NAOP Telnet Options.
The data sender requests or agrees to negotiate about output linefeed disposition with the data receiver.
In the case where agreement has been reached and in the absence of further subnegotiations, the data receiver is assumed to be handling output linefeed considerations.
The data sender refuses to negotiate about output linefeed disposition with the data receiver, or demands a return to the unnegotiated default mode.
The data receiver requests or agrees to negotiate about output linefeed disposition with the sender.
In the case where agreement has been reached and in the absence of further subnegotiations, the data receiver alone is assumed to be handling output linefeed considerations.
The data receiver refuses to negotiate about output linefeed disposition, or demands a return to the unnegotiated default mode.
IAC SB NAOLFD DS <8 bit value> IAC SE
The data sender specifies, with the 8 bit value, which party should handle output linefeeds and what their disposition should be.
The code for DS is 1.
IAC SB NAOLFD DR <8 bit value> IAC SE
The data receiver specifies, with the 8 bit value, which party should handle output linefeeds and what their disposition should be.
The code for DR is 0.
In the default absence of negotiations concerning which party, data under or data receiver, is handling output linefeed considerations, neither party is required nor prohibited from handling linefeeds; but it is appropriate if at least the data receiver handles them, albeit primitively.
and DR SB commands as follows:
Command sender suggests that he alone will handle linefeeds, for the connection.
The value is the number of character times to wait or number of NULs to insert in the data stream before sending the next data character.
Note that, due to the assynchrony of the two simplex connections, phase problems can occur with this option.
The guiding rules are that: 1) if neither data receiver nor data sender wants to handle output linefeeds, the data receiver must do it, and 2) if both data receiver and data sender want to handle output linefeed disposition, the data sender gets to do it.
The reasoning for the former rule is that if neither wants to do it, then the default in the NAOLFD option dominates.
If both want to do it, the sender, who is presumed to have special knowledge about the data, should be allowed to do it, taking into account any suggestions the receiver may make.
Simulation is defined as the replacement of the linefeed character by new line (see following) and enough blanks to move the print head (or line pointer) to the same lateral position it occupied just prior to receiving the linefeed.
To avoid infinite recursion, such simulation is allowed only for linefeed characters that are not immediately preceded by carriage returns (that is, part of a Telnet new line combination).
It is assumed that linefeed simulation will be necessary for printers that do not have a separate linefeed (like the IBM 2741)
; in this case, due to the assynchrony of network transmissions.
Additionally, due to the presence of the Telnet end of line convention, it may be necessary to add carriage return padding or delay after the associated linefeed
As with all option negotiations, neither party should suggest a state already in effect except to refuse to negotiate; changes should be acknowledged; and once refused, an option should not be
