Abstract Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS), described in RFC 3031, is a method for forwarding packets that uses short, fixed length values carried by packets, called labels, to determine packet next hops.
A fundamental concept in MPLS is that two Label Switching Routers (LSRs) must agree on the meaning of the labels used to forward traffic between and through them.
This common understanding is achieved by using a set of procedures, called a Label Distribution Protocol (as described in RFC 3036) , by which one LSR informs another of label bindings it has made.
One such protocol, called LDP, is used by LSRs to distribute labels to support MPLS forwarding along normally routed paths.
This document reports on a survey of LDP implementations conducted in August 2002 as part of the process of advancing LDP from Proposed to Draft Standard.
Introduction Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) is a method for forwarding packets that uses short fixed length values carried by packets, called labels, to determine packet next hops [RFC3031].
A fundamental MPLS concept is that two Label Switching Routers (LSRs) must agree on the meaning of the labels used to forward traffic between and through them.
This common understanding is achieved by using a set of procedures by which one LSR informs another of label bindings it has made.
Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) specifies a set of procedures LSRs use to distribute labels to support MPLS forwarding along normally routed paths.
LDP was specified originally by [RFC3036].
The current LDP specification is [RFC5036], which obsoletes [RFC3036].
[RFC3037] describes the applicability of LDP.
This document reports on a survey of LDP implementations conducted in August 2002 as part of the process of advancing LDP from Proposed to Draft standard.
This section highlights some of the survey results.
Section 2 presents the survey results for LDP features, and Appendix A presents the survey results in full.
Appendix B contains a copy of the survey form.
The LDP implementation survey requested the following information about LDP implementation:  Responding organization.
Provisions were made to accommodate organizations that wished to respond anonymously.
The status, availability, and origin of the LDP implementation.
The LDP features implemented and for each whether it was tested against an independent implementation.
The survey form listed each LDP feature defined by [RFC3036] and requested one of the following as the status of the feature:
: Tested against another independent implementation
Implemented but not tested against independent implementation n:
Not applicable to this type of implementation
In addition, for the 'n' status, the responder could optionally provide the following additional information:
RFC specification inadequate, unclear, or confusing u: Utility of feature unclear r:
Feature not required for feature set implemented This document uses the following conventions for reporting survey results for a feature: At By Cn indicates:  A responders implemented the feature and tested it against another independent implementation (t)
B responders implemented the feature but have not tested it against an independent implemented (y)  C responders did not implement the feature (n)
(Ds Eu Fr) indicates optional responses:  D responders thought the RFC 3036 specification of the feature inadequate, unclear, or confusing (s).
E responders thought the utility of the feature unclear (u).
F responders considered the feature not required for the feature set implemented (combines x and r).
This section presents some highlights from the implementation survey.
There were 12 responses to the survey, 2 of which were anonymous.
At the time of the survey, 10 of the implementation were available as products and 2 were in beta test.
Eleven of the implementations were available for sale; the remaining implementation had been done by a company no longer in business.
Seven implementations were independently written from the RFC 3036 specification.
Four implementations combined purchased or free code with code written by the responder.
One of the implementations was fully purchased code ported to the vendor's platform.
Every LDP feature in the survey questionnaire was implemented by at least 2 respondents.
Each of the 8 LDP Label Distribution Modes implemented and tested: 8t 2y 2n
DU,  Ord Cntl, Lib reten 7t 1y 4n   DU,  Ind Cntl
, Lib reten 7t 1y 4n
, Cons reten 6t 1y 5n   DoD, Ind Cntl, Cons reten 6t 1y 5n
DU,  Ord Cntl, Cons reten 6t 0y
DU,  Ind Cntl, Cons reten 4t 3y 5n   DoD, Ord Cntl
, Lib reten 4t 2y
DoD, Ind Cntl, Lib reten  Platform and Interface Label Spaces were both widely supported.
Per platform 7t 1y 4n  Per interface
LDP Basic and Targeted Sessions were both widely supported.
12t 0y 0n  Basic/Directly Connected 11t 1y 0n  Targeted
The TCP MD5 Option for LDP session TCP connections was not widely implemented.
Survey Results for LDP Features
This section presents the survey results for LDP features using the notational convention described in Section 1.2.
It omits the optional status responses (s, u, r); complete results may be found in Appendix A. Feature Survey
Result Interface types 12t 0y
Per platform 7t 1y 4n
Targeted LDP Sessions 12t 0y
Loop Detection 9t 2y 1n TCP MD5 Option 3t
FEC TLV 6t 5y 1n
Transport Addr TLV 12t 0y 0n
ATM Session Param TLV M values 5t
VP & VC Merge 6
KeepAlive Msg 12t 0y 0n
Label Mapping Msg 10t 0y
Bad TLV length 7t 5y 0n
Malformed TLV Value 11t 1y 0n
Security Considerations This document is a survey of existing LDP implementations; it does not specify any protocol behavior.
Thus, security issues introduced by the document are not discussed.
Full LDP Survey Results LDP Implementation Survey Form (V 1.0)   A. General Information Responders: Anonymous:   2
Inc. Data Connection Ltd. NetPlane Systems, Inc Redback Networks Riverstone Networks Trillium, An Intel Company Vivace Networks,
Inc. Wipro Technologies   B. LDP Implementation Status, Availability, Origin Status:
Other: Implementation based on:  (check all that apply)
[ 1]  Purchased code (please list source if possible)
t'   tested against another independent implementation '
implemented but not tested against independent implementation
'n'   not implemented 'x'   not applicable to this type of implementation Optional:
For 'n' status, indicate reason for not implementing using one of the following: 's'  RFC specification inadequate, unclear, or confusing '
u'  utility of feature unclear 'r
Frame Relay 6t 2y 4n(3r)
, Lib reten    2.6 6t 0y 6n(2u 2r)
DU, Ind cntl, Cons reten
2.6 4t 2y 6n(2u 2r)
DoD, Ind cntl, Lib reten
t 2y 1n TCP MD5 Option
2.9 3t 1y 8n(1u 1r 1x)
3.3 7t 4y 0n(1 noreply)
Common Session Param TLV   3.5.3
3y 6n(s 1 1r 1x)
2t 3y 7n(1u 1r 2x)
B.  LDP Implementation Survey Form LDP Implementation Survey Form (V 1.0)
The purpose of this form is to gather information about implementations of LDP as defined by RFC 3036.
The information is being requested as part of the process of advancing LDP from Proposed to Draft Standard.
The form is patterned after the implementation report form used for HTTP/1.1; see: http://www.ietf.org/IESG/Implementations/http1.1 implementations.txt   A. General Information Please provide the following information.
:   Contact for LDP information Name
: Title: E mail: Organization/department:
Fax:   B. LDP Implementation Status, Availability, Origin Please check [x] the boxes that apply.
Other: Implementation based on:  (check all that apply)
List portions developed internally:   C. LDP Feature Survey For each feature listed, please indicate the status of the implementation using one of the following: '
t'   tested against another independent implementation '
implemented but not tested against independent implementation 'n'   not implemented ' '
not applicable to this type of implementation
For 'n' status, indicate reason for not implementing using one of the following: 's'  RFC specification inadequate, unclear, or confusing '
u'  utility of feature unclear 'r
