Abstract This document specifies encoding of extensions to the OSPF routing protocol in support of Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS).
This document specifies extensions to the OSPF routing protocol [OSPF] in support of carrying link state information for Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS).
The set of required enhancements to OSPF are outlined in [GMPLS ROUTING].
In this section, we define the enhancements to the Traffic Engineering (TE) properties of GMPLS TE links that can be announced in OSPF TE LSAs.
The TE LSA, which is an opaque LSA with area flooding scope [OSPF TE], has only one top level Type/Length/Value (TLV) triplet and has one or more nested sub TLVs for extensibility.
The top level TLV can take one of two values (1) Router Address or (2) Link.
In this document, we enhance the sub TLVs for the Link TLV in support of GMPLS.
Specifically, we add the following sub TLVs to the Link TLV:
4    Link Protection Type 15    variable    Interface Switching Capability Descriptor 16    variable
Shared Risk Link Group The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14,
Link Local/Remote Identifiers Link Local/Remote Identifiers is a sub TLV of the Link TLV.
The type of this sub TLV is 11, and length is eight octets.
The value field of this sub TLV contains four octets of Link Local Identifier followed by four octets of Link Remote Identifier (see Section "Support for unnumbered links" of [GMPLS ROUTING]).
If the Link Remote Identifier is unknown, it is set to 0. 0
A node can communicate its Link Local Identifier to its neighbor using a link local Opaque LSA, as described in Section "Exchanging Link Local TE Information".
The Link Protection Type is a sub TLV of the Link TLV.
The type of this sub TLV is 14, and length is four octets. 0
The first octet is a bit vector describing the protection capabilities of the link (see Section "Link Protection Type" of [GMPLS ROUTING]).
The remaining three octets SHOULD be set to zero by the sender, and SHOULD be ignored by the receiver.
The Link Protection Type sub TLV may occur at most once within the Link TLV.
Shared Risk Link Group (SRLG)
The SRLG is a sub TLV (of type 16) of the Link TLV.
The length is the length of the list in octets.
The value is an unordered list of 32 bit numbers that are the SRLGs that the link belongs to.
Shared Risk Link Group Value
Shared Risk Link Group Value
This sub TLV carries the Shared Risk Link Group information (see Section "Shared Risk Link Group Information" of [GMPLS ROUTING]).
The SRLG sub TLV may occur at most once within the Link TLV.
Interface Switching Capability Descriptor The Interface Switching Capability Descriptor is a sub TLV (of type 15) of the Link TLV.
The length is the length of value field in octets.
(L2SC) 100   Time Division Multiplex Capable (TDM)
The Encoding field contains one of the values specified in Section 3.1.1 of [GMPLS SIG].
Maximum LSP Bandwidth is encoded as a list of eight 4 octet fields in the IEEE floating point format [IEEE], with priority 0 first and priority 7 last.
The units are bytes (not bits!)
The content of the Switching Capability specific information field depends on the value of the Switching Capability field.
When the Switching Capability field is PSC 1, PSC 2, PSC 3, or PSC 4, the Switching Capability specific information field includes Minimum LSP Bandwidth, Interface MTU, and padding. 0
The Minimum LSP Bandwidth is encoded in a 4 octets field in the IEEE floating point format.
The units are bytes (not bits!)
The Interface MTU is encoded as a 2 octets integer.
The padding is 2 octets, and is used to make the Interface Switching Capability Descriptor sub TLV 32 bits aligned.
It SHOULD be set to zero by the sender and SHOULD be ignored by the receiver.
When the Switching Capability field is L2SC, there is no Switching Capability specific information field present.
When the Switching Capability field is TDM, the Switching Capability specific information field includes Minimum LSP Bandwidth, an indication whether the interface supports Standard or Arbitrary SONET/SDH, and padding. 0
The Minimum LSP Bandwidth is encoded in a 4 octets field in the IEEE floating point format.
The units are bytes (not bits!)
The indication whether the interface supports Standard or Arbitrary SONET/SDH is encoded as 1 octet.
The value of this octet is 0 if the interface supports Standard SONET/SDH, and 1 if the interface supports Arbitrary SONET/SDH.
The padding is 3 octets, and is used to make the Interface Switching Capability Descriptor sub TLV 32 bits aligned.
It SHOULD be set to zero by the sender and SHOULD be ignored by the receiver.
When the Switching Capability field is LSC, there is no Switching Capability specific information field present.
To support interfaces that have more than one Interface Switching Capability Descriptor (see Section "Interface Switching Capability Descriptor" of [GMPLS ROUTING])
the Interface Switching Capability Descriptor sub TLV may occur more than once within the Link TLV.
The restarting node should follow the OSPF restart procedures [OSPF RESTART], and the RSVP TE restart procedures [GMPLS RSVP].
When a restarting node is going to originate its TE LSAs, the TE LSAs containing Link TLV should be originated with 0 unreserved bandwidth, Traffic Engineering metric set to 0xffffffff, and if the Link has LSC or FSC as its Switching Capability then also with 0 as Max LSP Bandwidth, until the node is able to determine the amount of unreserved resources taking into account the resources reserved by the already established LSPs that have been preserved across the restart.
Once the restarting node determines the amount of unreserved resources, taking into account the resources reserved by the already established LSPs that have been preserved across the restart, the node should advertise these resources in its TE LSAs.
In addition in the case of a planned restart prior to restarting, the restarting node SHOULD originate the TE LSAs containing Link TLV with 0 as unreserved bandwidth, and if the Link has LSC or FSC as its Switching Capability then also with 0 as Max LSP Bandwidth.
This would discourage new LSP establishment through the restarting router.
Neighbors of the restarting node should continue advertise the actual unreserved bandwidth on the TE links from the neighbors to that node.
Regular graceful restart should not be aborted if a TE LSA or TE topology changes.
TE graceful restart need not be aborted if a TE LSA or TE topology changes.
Exchanging Link Local TE Information
It is often useful for a node to communicate some Traffic Engineering information for a given interface to its neighbors on that interface.
One example of this is a Link Local Identifier.
If nodes X and Y are connected by an unnumbered point to point interface I, then X's Link Local Identifier for I is
Y's Link Remote Identifier for I.  X can communicate its Link Local Identifier for I by exchanging with Y a TE link local opaque LSA described below.
Note that this information need only be exchanged over interface
I, hence the use of a link local Opaque LSA.
A TE Link Local LSA is an opaque LSA of type 9
(link local flooding scope) with Opaque Type 1 (TE LSA) and Opaque ID of 0. 0
3 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
The format of the TLVs that make up the body of the TE Link Local LSA is the same as that of the TE TLVs: a 2 octet Type field followed by a 2 octet Length field which indicates the length of the Value field in octets.
The Top Level Type for the Link Local TLV is 4.
The Value field is zero padded at the end to a four octet boundary.
The only TLV defined here is the Link Local Identifier TLV, with Type 1, Length 4 and Value the 32 bit Link Local Identifier for the link over which the TE Link Local LSA is exchanged.
Ayan Banerjee Calient Networks 5853
Rue Ferrari San Jose, CA 95138
abanerjee@calient.net John Drake Calient Networks 5853
Rue Ferrari San Jose, CA 95138
jdrake@calient.net Greg Bernstein Ciena Corporation 10480 Ridgeview Court Cupertino, CA 94014
Don Fedyk Nortel Networks Corp. 600 Technology Park Drive Billerica, MA 01821
Eric Mannie Independent Consultant EMail:
Debanjan Saha Tellium Optical Systems 2 Crescent Place
901 Ocean Port, NJ 07757
Vishal Sharma Metanoia, Inc. 335 Elan Village Lane, Unit
203 San Jose, CA 95134 2539
Phone:  1.408.943.1794 EMail: v.sharma@ieee.org 6.
This document specifies the contents of Opaque LSAs in OSPFv2.
As Opaque LSAs are not used for SPF computation or normal routing, the extensions specified here have no direct effect on IP routing.
Tampering with GMPLS TE LSAs may have an effect on the underlying transport (optical and/or SONET SDH) network.
[OSPF TE] suggests mechanisms such as [OSPF SIG] to protect the transmission of this information, and those or other mechanisms should be used to secure and/or authenticate the information carried in the Opaque LSAs.
The memo introduces four new sub TLVs of the TE Link TLV in the TE Opaque LSA for OSPF v2; [OSPF TE]
says that the sub TLVs of the TE Link TLV in the range 10 32767 must be assigned by Expert Review, and must be registered with IANA.
The memo has four suggested values for the four sub TLVs of the TE Link TLV; it is strongly recommended that the suggested values be granted, as there are interoperable implementations using these values.
Finally, a new Top Level Type for OSPF TE LSAs for the Link Local TLV has been allocated from the Standards Action space.
