Abstract This memo contains a table of commonly occurring headers in headings of e mail messages.
The document compiles information from other RFCs such as RFC 822, RFC 1036, RFC 1123, RFC 1327, RFC 1496, RFC 1521, RFC 1766, RFC 1806, RFC 1864 and RFC 1911.
A few commonly occurring headers which are not defined in RFCs are also included.
For each header, the memo gives a short description and a reference to the RFC in which the header is defined.
Introduction Many different Internet standards and RFCs define headers which may occur on Internet Mail Messages and Usenet News Articles.
The intention of this document is to list all such headers in one document as an aid to people developing message systems or interested in Internet Mail standards.
The document contains all headers which the author has found in the following Internet standards: , RFC 822 [2], RFC 1036 [3], RFC 1123 [5], RFC 1327 [7], RFC 1496 [8], RFC 1521 [11], RFC 1766 [12], RFC 1806 [14], RFC 1864[17] and RFC 1911[20].
Note in particular that heading attributes defined in PEM (RFC 1421 1424) and MOSS (RFC 1848 [16]) are not included.
PEM and MOSS headers only appear inside the body of a message, and thus are not headers in the RFC 822 sense.
Mail attributes in envelopes, i.e. attributes controlling the message transport mechanism between mail and news servers, are not included.
This means that attributes from SMTP [1], UUCP [18] and NNTP [15] are mainly not covered either.
Headings used only in HTTP [19] are not included yet, but may be included in future version of this memo.
A few additional headers which often can be found in e mail headings but are not part of any Internet standard are also included.
For each header, the document gives a short description and a reference to the Internet standard or RFC, in which they are defined.
The header names given here are spelled the same way as when they are actually used.
This is usually American but sometimes English spelling.
One header in particular, "Organisation/Organization", occurs in e mail headers sometimes with the English and other times with the American spelling.
It is my intention to continue updating this document after its publication as an RFC.
The latest version, which may be more up to  date (but also less fully checked out) will be kept available for downloading from URL http://www.dsv.su.se/~jpalme/ietf mail attributes.pdf.
jpalme@dsv.su.se>) if you have noted headers which should be included in this memo but are not.
Use of gatewaying headers RFC 1327 defines a number of new headers in Internet mail, which are defined to map headers which X.400 has but which were previously not standardized in Internet mail.
The fact that a header occurs in RFC 1327 indicates that it is recommended for use in gatewaying messages between X.400 and Internet mail, but does not mean that the header is recommended for messages wholly within Internet mail.
Some of these headers may eventually see widespread implementation and use in Internet mail, but at the time of this writing (1996)
they are not widely implemented or used.
Headers defined only in RFC 1036 for use in Usenet News sometimes appear in mail messages, either because the messages have been gatewayed from Usenet News to e mail, or because the messages were written in combined clients supporting both e mail and Usenet News in the same client.
These headers are not standardized for use in Internet e mail and should be handled with caution by e mail agents.
These headers have not been standardized for general usage in the exchange of messages between Internet mail  based systems.
These headers have no standard meaning when appearing in e mail, some of them may even be used in different ways by different software.
When appearing in e mail, they should be handled with caution.
Note that RFC 1036, although generally used as a de facto standard for Usenet News, is not an official IETF standard or even on the IETF standards track. "
This header is not specified in any of referenced RFCs which define Internet protocols, including Internet Standards, draft standards or proposed standards.
The header appears here because it often appears in e  mail or Usenet News.
Usage of these headers is not in general recommended.
Some header proposed in ongoing IETF standards development work, but not yet accepted, are also marked in this way. "
Handling of such headers in incoming mail should be done with great caution.
Because of this, such headers should be handled with caution and understanding of the different possible interpretations.
These should only be used if both communicating parties agree on using them.
In practice, some experimental protocols become de facto standards before they are made into IETF standards.
attribute in final delivery, when the message leaves the SMTP environment in which "MAIL FROM" is used.
DL Expansion   RFC 1327, not for passed.
Indication: 3.3 Format and control information
An indicator that this message is    MIME Version:  RFC 1521: 3.
formatted according to the MIME standard, and an indication of which version of MIME is utilized.
Special Usenet News actions only.
Special Usenet News actions and a    Also Control:  son of RFC1036 normal article at the same time.
recipients such as a postmaster if delivery is not possible to the intended recipient.
This is primarily an X.400 facility.
In X.400, this is an envelope attribute and refers to disclosure of the envelope recipient list.
Disclosure of other recipients is in Internet mail done via the To:, cc:
experimental can also indicate a suggested filename for use when saving an attachment to a file.
It is however included, since people often ask about it.
This header is used in the so  called Unix mailbox format, also known as Berkely mailbox format or the MBOX format.
This is a format for storing a set of messages in a file.
A line beginning with "From " is used to separate successive messages in such files.
This header will thus appear when you use a text editor to look at a file in the Unix mailbox format.
Some mailers also use this format when printing messages on paper.
The information in this header should NOT be used to find an address to which replies to a message are to be sent.
From when transferred to a new host.
Sometimes called "From " header.
sent to a moderated newsgroup to allow its distribution to the newsgroup members.
Also used on certain control messages, which are only performed if they are marked as Approved.
Recipients not to be disclosed to    bcc:
RFC 822: 4.5.3, other recipients.
Non standard requested to comment on the information in this message or its attachments.
Unfortunately, the header can appear in e mail with two different and contradictory meanings: (a) Indicating the newsgroup recipient of an article/message sent to both e mail and Usenet News recipients.
In a personally addressed reply to an article in a news  group, indicating the newsgroup in which this discussion originated.
Inserted by Sendmail when there
envelope into the message heading.
This behavior is not quite proper, MTAs should not modify headings (except inserting Received lines), and it can in some cases cause Bcc recipients to be wrongly divulged to non Bcc recipients.
for use in e mail.
Fax number of the originator.
Phone number of the originator.
Version:, Mailer:, Originating  Client:, X  Mailer, X  Newsreader 3.5 Response control
ambiguous, since there are different kinds of replies, which the sender may wish to go to different addresses.
In particular, there are personal replies intended for only one person, and group replies, intended for the whole group of people who read the replied to message (often a mailing list, anewsgroup name cannot appear here because of different syntax, see "Followup To" below.).
Some mail systems use this header to indicate a better form of the e mail address of the sender.
Some mailing list expanders puts the name of the list in this header.
The personal opinion of the author of this RFC is that this header should be avoided except in special cases, but this is a personal opinion not shared by all specialists in the area.
different set of newsgroups than the replied to article.
The most common usage is when an article is posted to several newsgroups, and further discussions is to take place in only one of them.
In e mail, this header may occur in a message which is sent to both e mail and Usenet News, to show where follow up in Usenet news is wanted.
The header does not say anything about where follow up in e mail is to be sent.
Note that the value of this header must always be one or more newsgroup names, never e mail addresses.
To: Internet standards recommend, however, the use of RCPT TO and Return Path, not Errors To, for where delivery notifications are to be sent.
is to want such a report.
Default is not to generate such a    Report: report.
message is a reply to.
reference to replied to articles.
This field may in the future be replaced with "Supersedes:".
In Usenet News, however, Supersedes causes a full deletion of the replaced article in the server, while "Supersedes" and "Obsoletes" in e  mail is implemented in the client and often does not remove the old version of the text.
3.7 Other textual headers Search keys for data base
messages replying to or commenting on other messages.
not standardized for use in e mail.
this, do not use this header for text which you want to ensure that the recipient gets.
Some Internet mail systems also use the date when the message was submitted.
RFC 1036: 2.2.4, be used both to limit the time of
meaningful after a certain date, and to extend the storage of important articles.
Time at which a message loses its    Expiry Date:
RFC 1327, not for validity.
future be replaced by "Expires:".
Common values are "bulk" and "first class".
Other uses is to control automatic replies and to control return of content facilities, and to stop mailing list loops.
Not used to control transmission speed.
The absence of this header in messages gatewayed from X.400 indicates that the message is not sensitive.
message, e.g. "en" for English.
message, e.g. "en" for English.
This is part of a format some mailers use when showing a message to its users, and this header should not be used when sending a message through the net.
The use of this header in transmission of a message can cause several robustness and interoperability problems.
The body of this message
Conversion: with the same values.
set to another if information will be lost.
The MIME definition should be used in generating mail.
RFC 1766 defines a parameter "difference" to this header.
that this is a delivery report gatewayed from X.400.
information, some for encoding and length information, some for a kind of boundary information, some in other ways.
message, headers referring to the
RFC 1864, proposed that it has not been modified.
Only for local usage within one Usenet News server, should not be sent between servers.
values of this field are: U    message is not downloaded and not deleted.
R    message is read or downloaded.
O    message is old but not deleted.
N    new (a new message also sometimes is distinguished by not having any "Status:" header.
Combinations of these characters can occur, such as "Status: OR" to indicate that a message is downloaded but not deleted.
(Multipurpose    Draft Internet Mail Extensions)
A Proposed Standard for the Stream    standard Based Transmission of News", RFC 977, January 1986.
RFC 822   bcc cc Comments Date From In Reply
To Keywords Message ID Received References Reply To Resent  Resent bcc Resent cc Resent Date Resent From Resent From Resent Message ID Resent Reply To Resent
Alternate recipient Auto Forwarded Autoforwarded Content Identifier Content Return Conversion Conversion With Loss Delivery Date Discarded X400 IPMS
Extensions Discarded X400 MTS Extensions
Disclose Recipients DL Expansion History Expiry Date Generate Delivery Report Importance
Incomplete Copy Language Message Type Delivery Obsoletes Original Encoded Information Types Prevent NonDelivery Report Priority Reply
By Report Sensitivity RFC 1505
Encoding RFC 1521   Content Description Content ID Content Transfer Encoding Content Type MIME Version RFC 1806   Content Disposition RFC 1864   Content MD5 RFC 1911
Importance Sensitivity son of RFC1036 [21]
Also Control Article Names Article Updates See Also Supersedes
Apparently to Content Base Content Length Content Location Content SGML Entity Encoding Errors To Return Receipt To Fax "From "
Telefax Fcc For Comment For Handling
Mail System Version Mailer Organisation Originating Client Phone Status Supersedes X400 Content Return X Mailer X Newsreader Appendix B:
see Discarded X400 IPMS Extensions, Discarded  X400 MTS Extensions
To Transfer Encoding see Content Transfer Encoding Type see
Content Type, Message Type, Original Encoded  Information Types Version, see MIME Version, X Mailer 3.4
X Mailer see also Mail System Version 3.4
