RFC Streams, Headers, and Boilerplates Abstract RFC documents contain a number of fixed elements such as the title page header, standard boilerplates, and copyright/IPR statements.
This document describes them and introduces some updates to reflect current usage and requirements of RFC publication.
In particular, this updated structure is intended to communicate clearly the source of RFC creation and review.
This document obsoletes RFC 5741, moving detailed content to an IAB web page and preparing for more flexible output formats.
Previously, RFCs (e.g., [RFC4844]) contained a number of elements that were there for historical, practical, and legal reasons.
They also contained boilerplate material to clearly indicate the status of the document and possibly contained "Notes" to indicate how the document interacts with IETF Standards Track documents.
As the RFC Series has evolved over the years, there has been increasing concern over appropriate labeling of the publications to make clear the status of each RFC and the status of the work it describes.
Chiefly, there is a requirement that RFCs published as part of the IETF's review process not be easily confused with RFCs that may have had a very different review and approval process.
Various adjustments have been made over the years, including evolving text of "Notes" included in the published RFC.
With the definition of the different RFC streams [RFC4844], it is appropriate to formalize the definition of the various pieces of standard RFC boilerplate and introduce some adjustments to ensure better clarity of expression of document status, aligned with the review and approval processes defined for each stream.
This memo identifies and describes the common elements of RFC boilerplate structure.
It describes the content required for each kind of information.
Details of the exact textual and layout requirements are left to a web page maintained by the IAB, with due consultation with the community, for ease of maintenance.
The changes introduced by this memo should be implemented as soon as practically possible after the document has been approved for publication.
RFC Streams and Internet Standards
Users of RFCs should be aware that while all Internet Standards  related documents are published as RFCs, not all RFCs are Internet Standards related documents.
The IETF is responsible for maintaining the Internet Standards Process, which includes the requirements for developing, reviewing, and approving Standards Track and BCP RFCs.
The IETF also produces non Standards Track documents (Informational, Experimental, and Historic).
All documents published as part of the IETF Stream are reviewed by the appropriate IETF bodies.
Documents published in streams other than the IETF stream are not generally reviewed by the IETF for such things as security, congestion control, or inappropriate interaction with deployed protocols.
They have also not been subject to approval by the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), including an IETF wide last call.
Therefore, the IETF disclaims, for any of the non IETF stream documents, any knowledge of the fitness of those RFCs for any purpose.
[RFC5742], [RFC4844], [RFC6410], and [RFC7127] and their successors for current details of the IETF process and RFC streams.
This section describes the elements that are commonly found in RFCs published today.
This document specifies information that is required in these publications.
Exact specification of the textual values required therein are provided by an IAB web page (https://www.iab.org/documents/headers boilerplate).
As noted above, this web page is maintained by the IAB with due consultation with the community.
Following such consultation, if the IAB decides to make any changes to this material, the changes will be announced in a similar fashion to other IAB statements.
The initial text to be used in that web page is included in Appendix A. 3.1.
The information at the front of the RFC includes the name and affiliation of the authors as well as the RFC publication month and year.
There is a set of additional information that is needed at the front of the RFC.
Historically, this has been presented with the information below in a left hand column, and the author related information described above in the right.
This describes the area where the work originates.
Historically, all RFCs were labeled "Network Working Group".
Network Working Group refers to the original version of today's IETF when people from the original set of ARPANET sites and whomever else was interested
the meetings were open   got together to discuss, design, and document proposed protocols [RFC3].
Here, we obsolete the term "Network Working Group" in order to indicate the originating stream.
> is the name of the RFC stream, as defined in [RFC4844] and its successors.
Internet Architecture Board    Internet Research Task Force    Independent Submission Request for Comments:  <RFC number
This indicates the RFC number, assigned by the RFC Editor upon publication of the document.
Some document categories are also labeled as a subseries of RFCs.
These elements appear as appropriate for such categories, indicating the subseries and the documents number within that series.
Currently, there are subseries for BCPs [RFC2026] and STDs
These subseries numbers may appear in several RFCs.
For example, when a new RFC obsoletes or updates an old one, the same subseries number is used.
Also, several RFCs may be assigned the same subseries number: a single STD, for example, may be composed of several RFCs, each of which will bear the same STD number.
Some relations between RFCs in the series are explicitly noted in the RFC header.
For example, a new RFC may update one or more earlier RFCs.
Currently two relationships are defined: "Updates" and "Obsoletes" [RFC7322].
Variants like "Obsoleted by" are also used (e.g, in [RFC5143]).
Other types of relationships may be defined by the RFC Editor and may appear in future RFCs.
This indicates the initial RFC document category of the publication.
These are defined in [RFC2026].
Currently, this is always one of: Standards Track, Best Current Practice, Experimental, Informational, or Historic.
The first paragraph of the "Status of This Memo" section contains a single sentence, clearly standing out.
The sentence will clearly identify the stream specific status of the document.
The text to be used is defined by the stream, with a review for clarity by the IAB and RFC Series Editor.
The second paragraph of the "Status of This Memo" will include a paragraph describing the type of review and exposure the document has received.
This is defined on a per stream basis, subject to general review and oversight by the RFC Editor and IAB.
The IAB defines a specific structure defined to ensure there is clarity about review processes and document types.
The boilerplate ends with a reference to where further relevant information can be found.
This information may include, subject to the RFC Editor's discretion, information about whether the RFC has been updated or obsoleted, the RFC's origin, a listing of possible errata, information about how to provide feedback and suggestion, and information on how to submit errata as described in [ERRATA].
The exact wording and URL is subject to change (at the RFC Editor's discretion), but the current text is: Information about the current status of this document, any errata, and how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at http://www.rfc editor.org/<static path>/rfc
Noteworthy Note that the text in paragraph 1 and 2 of the boilerplate indicate the initial status of a document.
During their lifetime, documents can change status to, for example, Historic.
This cannot be reflected in the document itself and will need be reflected in the information referred to in Section 5.
Exceptionally, a review and publication process may prescribe additional notes that will appear as labeled notes after the "Abstract".
This is no longer a common feature of recent RFCs.
It is the goal of this document to continue to ensure that the overall RFC structure is adequately clear so that such notes are unnecessary or (at least) truly exceptional.
Other Structural Information in RFCs RFCs contain other structural informational elements.
The RFC Editor is responsible for the positioning and layout of these structural elements.
Note also that new elements may be introduced or obsoleted using a process consistent with [RFC4844].
These additions may or may not require documentation in an RFC.
Currently, the following structural information is available in RFCs:
A copyright notice with a reference to BCP 78 [BCP78] and an Intellectual Property statement referring to BCP 78 and BCP 79
The content of these statements are defined by those BCPs.
The International Standard Serial Number [ISO.3297.2007]: ISSN 2070 1721.
The ISSN uniquely identifies the RFC series as title regardless of language or country in which it is published.
The ISSN itself has no significance other than the unique identification of a serial publication.
This document tries to clarify the descriptions of the status of an RFC.
Misunderstanding the status of a memo could cause interoperability problems, hence security and stability problems.
The RFC Editor is responsible for maintaining the consistency of the RFC series.
To that end, the RFC Editor maintains an "RFC Style Guide" [RFC7322].
In this memo, we mention a few explicit structural elements that the RFC Editor needs to maintain.
The conventions for the content and use of all current and future elements are documented in the style guide.
Adding a reference to the stream in the header of RFCs is only one method for clarifying from which stream an RFC originated.
The RFC Editor is encouraged to add such indication in, for example, indices and interfaces.
Appendix A.  Initial Formatting Details
This section contains the text the IAB used to initially populate the web page used to maintain the list of required verbiage.
[more author info as appropriate]
] Category: <category> <month year
For example, the header for RFC 6410 appears as follows:
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
The following are the approved texts for use in the first paragraph of the "Status of This Memo" portion of an RFC.
See Section 3.3 of RFC 7841.
"This is an Internet Standards Track document."
For 'Best Current Practices' documents:  "This memo documents an Internet Best Current Practice."
For other categories  "This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; <it is published for other purposes>."
For Informational, Experimental, Historic, and future categories of RFCs, the RFC Editor will maintain an appropriate text for <it is published for other purposes
"it is published for informational purposes."
"it is published for the historical record."
"it is published for examination, experimental implementation, and evaluation.
Second Paragraph See Section 3.4 of RFC 7841.
The second paragraph may include some text that is specific to the initial document category.
When a document is Experimental or Historic, the second paragraph opens with: Experimental:  "This document defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community."
"This document defines a Historic Document for the Internet community.
" The text that follows is stream dependent   these are initial values and may be updated by stream definition document updates and recorded by the IAB on the web page.
"This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
" If there has been an IETF consensus call per IETF process, this additional text should be added: "It represents the consensus of the IETF community.
It has received public review and has been approved for publication by the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).
If there has not been such a consensus call, then this simply reads: "It has been approved for publication by the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG)."
"This document is a product of the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), and represents information that the IAB has deemed valuable to provide for permanent record.
" If the document represents IAB consensus, this additional text should be added: "It represents the consensus of the Internet Architecture Board (IAB)." IRTF Stream:
"This document is a product of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
The IRTF publishes the results of Internet  related research and development activities.
These results might not be suitable for deployment."
In addition, a sentence indicating the consensus base within the IRTF may be added: "This RFC represents the consensus of the <insert name> Research Group of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)." or alternatively "This RFC represents the individual opinion(s) of one or more members of the <insert name> Research Group of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)".
"This is a contribution to the RFC Series, independently of any other RFC stream.
The RFC Editor has chosen to publish this document at its discretion and makes no statement about its value for implementation or deployment."
For non IETF stream documents, a reference to Section 2 of this RFC is added with the following sentence: "Documents approved for publication by the [stream approver   currently, one of: "IAB", "IRSG", or "RFC Editor"] are not a candidate for any level of Internet Standard; see Section 2 of RFC 7841.
" For IETF stream documents, a similar reference is added: "Further information on (BCPs or Internet Standards) is available in Section 2 of RFC 7841." for BCP and Standard Track documents; "Not all documents approved by the IESG are a candidate for any level of Internet Standards; see Section 2 of RFC 7841." for all other categories. A.2.3.
Third Paragraph See Section 3.5 of RFC 7841.
IAB Members at Time of Approval
The IAB members at the time this memo was approved were (in alphabetical order):
Jari Arkko Mary Barnes Marc Blanchet
Joe Hildebrand Russ Housley Erik Nordmark Robert Sparks
Andrew Sullivan Dave Thaler Brian Trammell Suzanne Woolf
