Abstract The NTP Server Option for Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6) provides
NTPv4 (Network Time Protocol version 4) server location information to DHCPv6 hosts.
This document defines a DHCPv6 option and associated suboptions to provide Network Time Protocol version 4 [RFC5905] or greater server location information to DHCPv6 hosts.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Related Work and Usage Model
The NTP service is publicly offered on the Internet by a number of organizations.
Those servers can be used but should not be abused, so any method that is tasked to disseminate locations of NTP servers must act responsibly in a manner that does not lead to public server overloading.
When using DHCPv6 to offer NTP server location, and if there is a need to distribute a host with a hardcoded configuration, this configuration MUST NOT include server location that is not part of the organization that distributes this device.
Typical usage of this option is to specify an NTP server that is part of the organization that operates the DHCPv6 server.
The location of the NTP service, like any other Internet service, can be specified by an IP address or a Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN).
By design, DHCP offers information to multiple devices and is prone to amplification of mistakes, so great care must be taken to define its configuration.
Specification of the NTP service by FQDN offers a level of indirection that works as a possible mitigation tool in case of misconfiguration.
DNS can be used to redirect misconfigured clients to an IPv6 address that is not configured on any host instead of having to change the address of the NTP server itself.
While the NTP specification defines a comprehensive set of configuration parameters, modification of those parameters is best left to the decision of the client itself.
The DHCPv6 option for NTP is therefore restricted to server location.
NTP Server Option for DHCPv6
This option serves as a container for server location information related to one NTP server or Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP)
This option can appear multiple times in a DHCPv6 message.
Each instance of this option is to be considered by the NTP client or SNTP client as a server to include in its configuration.
The option itself does not contain any value.
Instead, it contains one or several suboptions that carry NTP server or SNTP server location.
This option MUST include one, and only one, time source suboption.
The currently defined time source suboptions are NTP OPTION SRV ADDR, NTP OPTION SRV MC ADDR, and NTP OPTION SRV FQDN.
It carries the NTP server or SNTP server location as a unicast or multicast IPv6 address or as an NTP server or SNTP server FQDN.
More time source suboptions may be defined in the future.
While the FQDN option offers the most deployment flexibility, resiliency as well as security, the IP address options are defined to cover cases where a DNS dependency is not desirable.
If the NTP server or SNTP server location is an IPv6 multicast address, the client SHOULD use this address as an NTP multicast group address and listen to messages sent to this group in order to synchronize its clock.
This document does not define any priority relationship between the client's embedded configuration (if any) and the NTP or SNTP servers discovered via this option.
In particular, the client is allowed to simultaneously use its own configured NTP servers or SNTP servers and the servers discovered via DHCP.
This suboption is intended to appear inside the OPTION NTP SERVER option.
It specifies the IPv6 unicast address of an NTP server or SNTP server available to the client.
NTP SUBOPTION SRV ADDR (1), suboption len: 16. 4.2.
This suboption is intended to appear inside the OPTION NTP SERVER option.
It specifies the IPv6 address of the IPv6 multicast group address used by NTP on the local network.
An IPv6 address, suboption code:
NTP SUBOPTION MC ADDR (2), suboption len: 16. 4.3.
This suboption is intended to appear inside the OPTION NTP SERVER option.
It specifies the FQDN of an NTP server or SNTP server available to the client.
SRV FQDN (3), suboption len:
Length of the included FQDN field, FQDN:
Fully Qualified Domain Name of the NTP server or SNTP server.
This field MUST be encoded as described in [RFC3315], Section 8.
Internationalized domain names are not allowed in this field.
The OPTION NTP SERVER option can appear multiple times in a DHCPv6 message.
The order in which these options appear is not significant.
The client uses its usual algorithms to determine which server(s) or multicast group(s) should be preferred to synchronize its clock.
The OPTION NTP SERVER option MUST NOT appear in messages other than the following: Solicit, Advertise, Request, Renew, Rebind, Information Request, and Reply.
If this option appears in messages other than those specified above, the receiver MUST ignore it.
The option number for this option MAY appear in the "Option Request" option [RFC3315] in the following messages: Solicit, Request, Renew, Rebind, Information Request, and Reconfigure.
If this option number appears in the "Option Request" option in messages other than those specified above, the receiver SHOULD ignore it.
This option could be used by an intruder to advertise the address of a malicious NTP server or SNTP server and adversely affect the clock of clients on the network.
The consequences of such an attack can be critical, because many security protocols depend on time synchronization to run their algorithms.
As an example, an attacker could break connectivity between SEND enabled nodes [RFC3971], simply by affecting the clock on these nodes.
To prevent these attacks, it is strongly advisable to secure the use of this option by either:  using the NTPv4 Autokey public key authentication, as defined in [RFC5906]
or,  using authenticated DHCP as described in [RFC3315], Section 21.
RFC 4075 Deprecation "Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP)
[RFC4075] provides some degree of automatic time server configuration for IPv6, as it specifies how to transmit SNTP [RFC4330] server addresses through DHCPv6.
However, this approach is not suitable for all NTP deployments.
It is not an extensible mechanism and introduces some semantic confusion through the use of the "SNTP" acronym.
Additionally, the approach of only offering IPv6 addresses to specify server location does not meet NTP requirements that make use of an FQDN (Fully Qualified Domain Name) as well.
For all the abovementioned reasons, this document makes [RFC4075] deprecated.
IANA Considerations IANA has assigned 56 as an option code from the "DHCPv6 Options Codes" registry for OPTION NTP SERVER.
IANA is required to maintain a new number space of NTP time source suboptions, located in the BOOTP DHCP Parameters Registry.
The initial suboptions are described in Section 4 of this document.
IANA assigns future NTP time source suboptions with an "IETF Consensus" policy as described in [RFC5226].
Future proposed suboptions are to be referenced symbolically in the documents that describe them, and shall be assigned numeric codes by IANA when approved for publication as an RFC.
