In section 4.2.4, replace three references to 4.3.1 by 4.2.1, and one reference to 4.2.2 by 4.1.2.
In section 5.2, replace "1  mailbox" with "1#mailbox", "1 msg id" with "1#msg id" and "1 encoded type" with "1#encoded type".
In most cases, ordering of O/R name components is not significant for the mappings specified by this document.
However, Organisational Units and Domain Defined Attributes are specified as SEQUENCE, in P1.ORName, and so their order may be significant.
This specification needs to take account of this in two ways: 1)   To allow consistent mapping into the domain hierarchy 2)
To ensure preservation of order over multiple mappings.
There are three places where an order must be specified: 1)
On the text encoding (std orname) of P1.ORName as used in the local part of an RFC 822 address, the most significant component must be on the RHS.
This applies only to those components which may have multiple values (Organisational Unit, and Domain Defined Attributes).
Other attributes may be presented in any order.
Note that in dmn orname specified in Appendix F, this ordering is already implied by the current ordering requirements.
For the Organisational Units (OU) in P1.ORName, the first OU in the SEQUENCE is the most signicicant.
This follows the "natural" hierarchy of the specification of P1.ORName, where the most significant components are defined first.
For the Domain Defined Attributes in P1.ORName, the First Domain Defined Attribute in the SEQUENCE is the most significant.
Note that although the ordering defined in 2) and 3) is mandatory for this mapping, there are NO implications on ordering significance within X.400.
To Deal with Omitted Components Implementation of RFC 987 has proved to be a little inflexible for some naming strategies.
The strategy proposed is to introduce the concept of explicit missing components to the symmetrical mapping described in 4.2.1.
Essentially, a domain may be associated with an omitted attribute in conjuction with several present ones.
When performing the algorithmic insertion of components lower in the hierarchy, the omitted value should be skipped.
For example, if "GMD.DFN" is associated with "C DE", "ADMD DBP", "PRMD GMD", and omitted organisation, then "ZI.GMD.DFN" is mapped with "C DE", "ADMD DBP", "PRMD GMD", "OU ZI".
It should be noted that attributes may have null values, and that this is treated separately from omitted attributes
(whilst it would be bad practice to treat these two cases differently, they must be allowed for in practice).
This corresponds to an omitted attribute.
Appendix F Format of address mapping tables
A new Appendix F is defined as follows: There is a need to specify the association between the domain and X.400 namespaces described in 4.2.1.
This is defined as a table syntax, but the syntax is defined in a manner which makes it suitable for use with domain nameservices (such as the Internet Domain nameservers or the UK NRS).
The mapping is not symmetric, and so a separate table is specified for each direction.
If multiple matches are possible, the longest possible match should be used.
Various restrictions are placed on the usage of dmn orname: 1)   Only C, ADMD, PRMD, O, and OU may be used.
There must be a strict ordering of all components, with the most significant components on the RHS.
No components may be omitted from the hierarchy, although the hierarchy may terminate at any level.
