Abstract This document specifies a Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) status code for use when resource access is denied as a consequence of legal demands.
This document specifies a Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) status code for use when a server operator has received a legal demand to deny access to a resource or to a set of resources that includes the requested resource.
This status code can be used to provide transparency in circumstances where issues of law or public policy affect server operations.
This transparency may be beneficial both to these operators and to end users.
[RFC4924] discusses the forces working against transparent operation of the Internet; these clearly include legal interventions to restrict access to content.
As that document notes, and as Section 4 of [RFC4084] states, such restrictions should be made explicit.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
451 Unavailable For Legal Reasons
This status code indicates that the server is denying access to the resource as a consequence of a legal demand.
The server in question might not be an origin server.
This type of legal demand typically most directly affects the operations of ISPs and search engines.
Responses using this status code SHOULD include an explanation, in the response body, of the details of the legal demand: the party making it, the applicable legislation or regulation, and what classes of person and resource it applies to.
For example: HTTP/1.1 451 Unavailable For Legal Reasons Link:
; rel "blocked by" Content Type: text/html <html> <head><title>Unavailable For Legal Reasons</title></head> <body
This request may not be serviced in the Roman Province of Judea due to the Lex Julia Majestatis, which disallows access to resources hosted on servers deemed to be operated by the People's Front of Judea.</p> </body
The use of the 451 status code implies neither the existence nor nonexistence of the resource named in the request.
That is to say, it is possible that if the legal demands were removed, a request for the resource still might not succeed.
Note that in many cases clients can still access the denied resource by using technical countermeasures such as a VPN or the Tor network.
A 451 response is cacheable by default, i.e., unless otherwise indicated by the method definition or explicit cache controls; see [RFC7234].
As noted above, when an attempt to access a resource fails with status 451, the entity blocking access might or might not be the origin server.
There are a variety of entities in the resource  access path that could choose to deny access   for example, ISPs, cache providers, and DNS servers.
It is useful, when legal blockages occur, to be able to identify the entities actually implementing the blocking.
When an entity blocks access to a resource and returns status 451, it SHOULD include a "Link" HTTP header field [RFC5988] whose value is a URI reference [RFC3986] identifying itself.
When used for this purpose, the "Link" header field MUST have a "rel" parameter whose value is "blocked by".
The intent is that the header be used to identify the entity actually implementing blockage, not any other entity mandating it.
A human  readable response body, as discussed above, is the appropriate location for discussion of administrative and policy issues.
Security Considerations Clients cannot rely upon the use of the 451 status code.
It is possible that certain legal authorities might wish to avoid transparency, and not only demand the restriction of access to certain resources, but also avoid disclosing that the demand was made.
The HTTP Status Codes Registry has been updated with the following entry:
The Link Relation Type Registry has been updated with the following entry:  Relation Name: blocked by  Description:
Identifies the entity that blocks access to a resource following receipt of a legal demand.
