Abstract As the scale of MPLS RSVP TE networks has grown, the number of Label Switched Paths (LSPs) supported by individual network elements has increased.
Various implementation recommendations have been proposed to manage the resulting increase in the amount of control plane state information.
However, those changes have had no effect on the number of labels that a transit Label Switching Router (LSR) has to support in the forwarding plane.
That number is governed by the number of LSPs transiting or terminated at the LSR and is directly related to the total LSP state in the control plane.
This document defines a mechanism to prevent the maximum size of the label space limit on an LSR from being a constraint to control plane scaling on that node.
It introduces the notion of preinstalled 'per TE link labels' that can be shared by MPLS RSVP TE LSPs that traverse these TE links.
This approach significantly reduces the forwarding plane state required to support a large number of LSPs.
This couples the feature benefits of the RSVP TE control plane with the simplicity of the Segment Routing (SR) MPLS forwarding plane.
The scaling of RSVP TE [RFC3209] control plane implementations can be improved by adopting the guidelines and mechanisms described in [RFC2961] and [RFC8370].
These documents do not affect the forwarding plane state required to handle the control plane state.
The forwarding plane state remains unchanged and is directly proportional to the total number of Label Switching Paths (LSPs) supported by the control plane.
This document describes a mechanism that prevents the size of the platform specific label space on a Label Switching Router (LSR) from being a constraint to pushing the limits of control plane scaling on that node.
This work introduces the notion of preinstalled 'per TE link labels' that are allocated by an LSR.
Each such label is installed in the MPLS forwarding plane with a 'pop' operation and instructions to forward the received packet over the TE link.
An LSR advertises this label in the Label object of a Resv message as LSPs are set up, and they are recorded hop by hop in the Record Route Object (RRO) of the Resv message as it traverses the network.
The ingress Label Edge Router (LER) constructs and pushes a stack of labels [RFC3031] using the labels received in the RRO.
These 'TE link labels' can be shared by MPLS RSVP TE LSPs that traverse the same TE link.
This forwarding plane behavior fits in the MPLS architecture [RFC3031] and is the same as that exhibited by Segment Routing (SR)
[RFC8402] when using an MPLS forwarding plane and a series of adjacency segments [SEG ROUTING].
This work couples the feature benefits of the RSVP TE control plane with the simplicity of the SR MPLS forwarding plane.
RSVP TE using a shared MPLS forwarding plane offers the following benefits: 1.
The transit label on a TE link is shared among RSVP TE tunnels traversing the link and is used independently of the ingress and egress of the LSPs.
setup time: No forwarding plane state needs to be programmed during LSP setup and teardown, resulting in faster provisioning and deprovisioning of LSPs.
Hitless rerouting: New transit labels are not required during make before break (MBB) in scenarios where the new LSP instance traverses the exact same path as the old LSP instance.
This saves the ingress LER and the services that use the tunnel from needing to update the forwarding plane with new tunnel labels, thereby making MBB events faster.
Periodic MBB events are relatively common in networks that deploy the 'auto bandwidth' feature on RSVP TE LSPs to monitor bandwidth utilization and periodically adjust LSP bandwidth.
Both 'TE link labels' and regular labels can be used on transit hops for a single RSVP TE tunnel (see Section 6).
This allows backward compatibility with transit LSRs that provide regular labels in Resv messages.
No additional extensions to routing protocols are required in order to support key functionalities such as bandwidth admission control, LSP priorities, preemption, and auto bandwidth on this shared MPLS forwarding plane.
This document also discusses how Fast Reroute [RFC4090] via facility backup link protection using regular bypass tunnels can be supported on this forwarding plane.
The signaling procedures and extensions discussed in this document do not apply to Point to Multipoint (P2MP) RSVP TE tunnels.
The following terms are used in this document: TE link label:
An incoming label at an LSR that will be popped by the LSR with the packet being forwarded over a specific outgoing TE link to a neighbor.
An MPLS forwarding plane where every participating LSR uses TE link labels on every LSP.
Segment Routed RSVP TE tunnel:
An MPLS RSVP TE tunnel that requests the use of a shared MPLS forwarding plane at every hop of the LSP.
The corresponding LSPs are referred to as "Segment Routed RSVP TE LSPs".
A transit hop of a Segment Routed RSVP TE LSP that is selected to assist in the imposition of the label stack in scenarios where the ingress LER cannot impose the full label stack.
There can be multiple delegation hops along the path of a Segment Routed RSVP TE LSP.
A label assigned at the delegation hop to represent a set of labels that will be pushed at this hop.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
Allocation of TE Link Labels
An LSR that participates in a shared MPLS forwarding plane MUST allocate a unique TE link label for each TE link.
When an LSR encounters a TE link label at the top of the label stack, it MUST pop the label and forward the packet over the TE link to the downstream neighbor on the RSVP TE tunnel.
Multiple TE link labels MAY be allocated for the TE link to accommodate tunnels requesting protection.
Implementations that maintain per label bandwidth accounting at each hop must aggregate the reservations made for all the LSPs using the shared TE link label.
Segment Routed RSVP TE Tunnel Setup
This section provides an example of how the RSVP TE signaling procedure works to set up a tunnel utilizing a shared MPLS forwarding plane.
The sample topology below is used to explain the example.
Labels shown at each node are TE link labels that, when present at the top of the label stack, indicate that they should be popped and that the packet should be forwarded on the TE link to the neighbor.
TE Link Labels Consider two tunnels: RSVP TE tunnel T1: From A to E on path
A B C D E RSVP TE tunnel T2: From F to E on path F B C D E
Both tunnels share the TE links B C, C D, and D E. RSVP TE is used to signal the setup of tunnel T1 (using the TE link label attributes flag defined in Section 9.2).
When LSR D receives the Resv message from the egress LER E, it checks the next hop TE link (D E) and provides the TE link label (250) in the Resv message for the tunnel placing the label value in the Label object.
It also provides the TE link label (250) in the Label sub object carried in the RRO and sets the TE link label flag as defined in Section 9.3.
Similarly, LSR C provides the TE link label (200) for the TE link C D, and LSR B provides the TE link label (150) for the TE link B C.
For tunnel T2, the transit LSRs provide the same TE link labels as described for tunnel T1 as the links B C, C D, and D E are common between the two LSPs.
The ingress LERs (A and F) will push the same stack of labels (from top of stack to bottom of stack) {150, 200, 250} for tunnels T1 and T2, respectively.
It should be noted that a transit LSR does not swap the top TE link label on an incoming packet (the label that it advertised in the Resv message it sent); all it has to do is pop the top label and forward the packet.
The values in the Label sub objects in the RRO are of interest to the ingress LERs when constructing the stack of labels to impose on the packets.
If, in this example, there were another RSVP TE tunnel T3 from F to I on path F B
C D E I, then this tunnel would also share the TE links B C, C D, and D E and traverse link E I.
The label stack used by F would be {150, 200, 250, 850}.
Hence, regardless of where the LSPs start and end, they will share LSR labels at shared hops in the shared MPLS forwarding plane.
There MAY be a local operator policy at the ingress LER that influences the maximum depth of the label stack that can be pushed for a Segment Routed RSVP TE tunnel.
Prior to signaling the LSP, the ingress LER may determine that it is unable to push a label stack containing one label for each hop along the path.
In some scenarios, the ingress LER may not have sufficient information to make that determination.
In these cases, the LER SHOULD adopt the techniques described in Section 5.
Delegating Label Stack Imposition One or more
transit LSRs can assist the ingress LER by imposing part of the label stack required for the path.
Consider the example in Figure 2 with an RSVP TE tunnel from A to L on path
A B C D E F G H I J K L.
In this case, the LSP is too long for LER A to impose the full label stack, so it uses the assistance of delegation hops LSR D and LSR I to impose parts of the label stack.
Each delegation hop allocates a delegation label to represent a set of labels that will be pushed at this hop.
When a packet arrives at a delegation hop LSR with a delegation label, the LSR pops the label and pushes a set of labels before forwarding the packet.
<Label>p TE link label <Label
>d Delegation label Figure 2: Delegating Label Stack Imposition 5.1.
When delegation labels come into play, there are two stacking approaches from which the ingress can choose.
Section 7 explains how the label stack can be constructed.
Stack to Reach Delegation Hop
In this approach, the stack pushed by the ingress carries a set of labels that will take the packet to the first delegation hop.
When this approach is employed, the set of labels represented by a delegation label at a given delegation hop will include the corresponding delegation label from the next delegation hop.
As a result, this delegation label can only be shared among LSPs that are destined to the same egress and traverse the same downstream path.
This approach is shown in Figure 3.
The delegation label 1250 represents the stack {300, 350, 400, 450, 1500}, and the delegation label 1500 represents the label stack {550, 600}.
Stack to Reach Delegation Hop
With this approach, the ingress LER A will push {150, 200, 1250} for the tunnel in Figure 2.
At LSR D, the delegation label 1250 will get popped, and {300, 350, 400, 450, 1500} will get pushed.
At LSR I, the delegation label 1500 will get popped, and the remaining set of labels {550, 600} will get pushed.
In this approach, the stack pushed by the ingress carries a set of labels that will take the packet all the way to the egress so that all the delegation labels are part of the stack.
When this approach is employed, the set of labels represented by a delegation label at a given delegation hop will not include the corresponding delegation label from the next delegation hop.
As a result, this delegation label can be shared among all LSPs traversing the segment between the two delegation hops.
The downside of this approach is that the number of hops that the LSP can traverse is dictated by the label stack push limit of the ingress.
This approach is shown in Figure 4.
The delegation label 1250 represents the stack {300, 350, 400, 450}, and the delegation label 1500 represents the label stack {550, 600}.
Stack to Reach Egress With this approach, the ingress LER A will push {150, 200, 1250, 1500} for the tunnel in Figure 2.
At LSR D, the delegation label 1250 will get popped, and {300, 350, 400, 450} will get pushed.
At LSR I, the delegation label 1500 will get popped, and the remaining set of labels {550, 600} will get pushed.
The signaling extension required for the ingress to indicate the chosen stacking approach is defined in Section 9.6. 5.2.
In this delegation option, the ingress LER can explicitly delegate one or more specific transit LSRs to handle pushing labels for a certain number of their downstream hops.
In order to accurately pick the delegation hops, the ingress needs to be aware of the label stack depth push limit (total number of MPLS labels that can be imposed, including all service/transport/special labels) of each of the transit LSRs prior to initiating the signaling sequence.
The mechanism by which the ingress or controller (hosting the path computation element) learns this information is outside the scope of this document.
Base MPLS Imposition MSD (BMI MSD) advertisement, specified in [RFC8491], is an example of such a mechanism.
The signaling extension required for the ingress LER to explicitly delegate one or more specific transit hops is defined in Section 9.4.
The extension required for the delegation hop to indicate that the recorded label is a delegation label is defined in Section 9.5.
In this approach, the ingress LER lets the downstream LSRs automatically pick suitable delegation hops during the initial signaling sequence.
The ingress does not need to be aware up front of the label stack depth push limit of each of the transit LSRs.
This approach SHOULD be used if there are loose hops [RFC3209] in the explicit route.
The delegation hops are picked based on a per hop signaled attribute called the Effective Transport Label Stack Depth (ETLD), as described in the next section.
Effective Transport Label Stack Depth (ETLD)
The ETLD is signaled as a per hop recorded attribute in the Path message [RFC7570].
When automatic delegation is requested, the ingress MUST populate the ETLD with the maximum number of transport labels that it can potentially send to its downstream hop.
This value is then decremented at each successive hop.
If a node is reached and it is determined that this hop cannot support automatic delegation, then it MUST NOT use TE link labels and use regular labels instead.
If a node is reached where the ETLD set from the previous hop is 1, then that node MUST select itself as the delegation hop.
If a node is reached and it is determined that this hop cannot receive more than one transport label, then that node MUST select itself as the delegation hop.
If there is a node or a sequence of nodes along the path of the LSP that do not support ETLD, then the immediate hop that supports ETLD MUST select itself as the delegation hop.
The ETLD MUST be decremented at each non delegation transit hop by either 1 or some appropriate number based on the local policy.
For example, consider a transit node with a local policy that mandates it to take the label stack read limit into account when decrementing the ETLD.
With this policy, the ETLD is decremented in such a way that the transit hop does not receive more labels in the stack than it can read.
At each delegation hop, the ETLD MUST be reset to the maximum number of transport labels that the hop can send, and the ETLD decrements start again at each successive hop until either a new delegation hop is selected or the egress is reached.
As a result, by the time the Path message reaches the egress, all delegation hops are selected.
During the Resv processing, at each delegation hop, a suitable delegation label is selected (either an existing label is reused or a new label is allocated) and recorded in the Resv message.
Consider the example shown in Figure 5.
Let's assume ingress LER A can push up to three transport labels while the remaining nodes can push up to five transport labels.
The ingress LER A signals the initial Path message with ETLD set to 3.
The ETLD value is adjusted at each successive hop and signaled downstream as shown.
By the time the Path message reaches the egress LER L, LSRs D and I are automatically selected as delegation hops.
When an LSP that requests automatic delegation also requests facility backup protection [RFC4090], the ingress or the delegation hop MUST account for the bypass tunnel's label(s) when populating the ETLD.
Hence, when a regular bypass tunnel is used to protect the facility, the ETLD that gets populated on these nodes is one less than what gets populated for a corresponding unprotected LSP.
Signaling extension for the ingress LER to request automatic delegation is defined in Section 9.4.
The extension for signaling the ETLD is defined in Section 9.7.
The extension required for the delegation hop to indicate that the recorded label is a delegation label is defined in Section 9.5.
Mixing TE Link Labels and Regular Labels in an RSVP TE Tunnel Labels can be mixed across transit hops in a single MPLS RSVP TE LSP.
Certain LSRs can use TE link labels and others can use regular labels.
The ingress can construct a label stack appropriately based on what type of label is recorded from every transit LSR.
Other labels are TE link labels Figure 6:
TE Link Labels and Regular Labels
If the transit LSR allocates a regular label to be sent upstream in the Resv, then the label operation at the LSR is a swap to the label received from the downstream LSR.
If the transit LSR is using a TE link label to be sent upstream in the Resv, then the label operation at the LSR is a pop and forward regardless of any label received from the downstream LSR.
There is no change in the behavior of a penultimate hop popping (PHP) LSR [RFC3031].
Section 7 explains how the label stack can be constructed.
For example, the LSP from A to I using path
A B C D E
I will use a label stack of {150, 200}.
The ingress LER or delegation hop MUST check the type of label received from each transit hop as recorded in the RRO in the Resv message and generate the appropriate label stack to reach the next delegation hop or the egress.
The following logic is used by the node constructing the label stack: Each RRO label sub object MUST be processed starting with the label sub object from the first downstream hop.
Any label provided by the first downstream hop MUST always be pushed on the label stack regardless of the label type.
If the label type is a TE link label, then any label from the next downstream hop MUST also be pushed on the constructed label stack.
If the label type is a regular label, then any label from the next downstream hop MUST NOT be pushed on the constructed label stack.
If the label type is a delegation label, then the type of stacking approach chosen by the ingress for this LSP (Section 5.1) MUST be used to determine how the delegation labels are pushed in the label stack.
The following section describes how link protection works with facility backup protection [RFC4090] using regular bypass tunnels for the Segment Routed RSVP TE tunnels.
The procedures for supporting node protection are not discussed in this document.
The use of Segment Routed bypass tunnels for providing facility protection is left for further study.
Link Protection To provide link protection at a Point of Local Repair (PLR) with a shared MPLS forwarding plane, the LSR MUST allocate a separate TE link label for the TE link that will be used for RSVP TE tunnels that request link protection from the ingress.
No signaling extensions are required to support link protection for RSVP TE tunnels over the shared MPLS forwarding plane.
At each LSR, link protected TE link labels can be allocated for each TE link, and a link protecting facility backup LSP can be created to protect the TE link.
The link protected TE link label can be sent by the LSR for LSPs requesting link protection over the specific TE link.
Since the facility backup terminates at the next hop (merge point), the incoming label on the packet will be what the merge point expects.
Consider the network shown in Figure 7.
LSR B can install a facility backup LSP for the link protected TE link label 151.
When the TE link B C is up, LSR B will pop 151 and send the packet to C.
The functionality discussed in this document imposes the following requirements on the signaling protocol.
The ingress of the LSP needs to have the ability to mandate/ request the use and recording of TE link labels at all hops along the path of the LSP.
TE Link Label Bit Number 16:
The presence of this flag in the LSP ATTRIBUTES/ LSP REQUIRED ATTRIBUTES object [RFC5420] of a Path message indicates that the ingress has requested/mandated the use and recording of TE link labels at all hops along the path of this LSP.
When a node that recognizes this flag but does not cater to the mandate because of local policy receives a Path message carrying the LSP REQUIRED ATTRIBUTES object with this flag set, it MUST send a PathErr message with an error code of 'Routing Problem (24)' and an error value of 'TE link label usage failure (70)'.
A transit hop that caters to this request/mandate MUST also check for the presence of other Attribute Flags introduced in this document (Sections 9.4 and 9.6) and process them as specified.
An ingress LER that sets this bit MUST also set the "label recording desired" flag [RFC3209] in the SESSION ATTRIBUTE object.
TE Link Label Flag (0x02):
The presence of this flag indicates that the recorded label is a TE link label.
This flag MUST be used by a node only if the use and recording of TE link labels are requested/mandated for the LSP.
LSI D Bit Number 17: Label Stack Imposition Delegation (LSI D)
Automatic Delegation: The presence of this flag in the LSP ATTRIBUTES object of a Path message indicates that the ingress has requested automatic delegation of label stack imposition.
This flag MUST be set in the LSP ATTRIBUTES object of a Path message only if the use and recording of TE link labels are requested/mandated for this LSP.
If the transit hop does not support this flag, it MUST NOT use TE link labels and use regular labels instead.
If the use of TE link labels was mandated in the LSP REQUIRED ATTRIBUTES object, it MUST send a PathErr message with an error code of 'Routing Problem (24)' and an error value of 'TE link label usage failure (70)'.
The presence of this flag in the HOP ATTRIBUTES sub object [RFC7570] of an Explicit Route Object (ERO) in the Path message indicates that the hop identified by the preceding IPv4 or IPv6 or Unnumbered Interface ID sub object has been picked as an explicit delegation hop.
The HOP ATTRIBUTES sub object carrying this flag MUST have the R (Required) bit set.
This flag MUST be set in the HOP ATTRIBUTES
sub object of an ERO object in the Path message only if the use and recording of TE link labels are requested/ mandated for this LSP.
If the hop recognizes this flag but is not able to comply with this mandate because of local policy, it MUST send a PathErr message with an error code of 'Routing Problem (24)' and an error value of 'Label stack imposition failure (71)'.
The presence of this flag indicates that the recorded label is a delegation label.
This flag MUST be used by a node only if the use and recording of TE link labels and delegation are requested/mandated for the LSP.
LSI D S2E Bit Number 18: Label Stack Imposition Delegation Stack to Reach Egress
The presence of this flag in the LSP ATTRIBUTES object of a Path message indicates that the ingress has chosen to use the "Stack to reach egress" approach for stacking.
The absence of this flag in the LSP ATTRIBUTES object of a Path message indicates that the ingress has chosen to use the "Stack to reach delegation hop" approach for stacking.
This flag MUST be set in the LSP ATTRIBUTES object of a Path message only if the use and recording of TE link labels and delegation are requested/mandated for this LSP.
If the transit hop is not able to support the "Stack to reach egress" approach, it MUST send a PathErr message with an error code of 'Routing Problem (24)' and an error value of 'Label stack imposition failure (71)'.
The format of the ETLD Attributes TLV is shown in Figure 8.
The Attribute TLV Type is 6. 0
The presence of this TLV in the HOP ATTRIBUTES sub object of an RRO object in the Path message
indicates that the hop identified by the preceding IPv4 or IPv6 or Unnumbered Interface ID sub object supports automatic delegation.
This attribute MUST be used only if the use and recording of TE link labels are requested/mandated and automatic delegation is requested for the LSP.
The ETLD field specifies the effective number of transport labels that this hop (in relation to its position in the path) can potentially send to its downstream hop.
It MUST be set to a non zero value.
The Reserved field is for future specification.
It SHOULD be set to zero on transmission and MUST be ignored on receipt to ensure future compatibility.
OAM Considerations MPLS LSP ping and traceroute [RFC8029]
are applicable for Segment Routed RSVP TE tunnels.
The existing procedures allow for the label stack imposed at a delegation hop to be reported back in the Label Stack Sub TLV in the MPLS echo reply for traceroute.
: TE Link Label, LSI D, LSI D S2E IANA manages the 'Attribute Flags' subregistry as part of the 'Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic Engineering (RSVP TE)
Parameters' registry located at <http://www.iana.org/assignments/ rsvp te parameters
This document introduces three new Attribute Flags:
No  [RFC8577], Section 9.2 17
No  [RFC8577], Section 9.6 11.2.
ETLD IANA manages the "Attribute TLV Space" registry as part of the 'Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic Engineering (RSVP TE)
Parameters' registry located at <http://www.iana.org/assignments/ rsvp te parameters
This document introduces a new Attribute TLV.
Allowed on  Reference LSP ATTRIBUTES LSP
REQUIRED  LSP Hop  ATTRIBUTES   Attributes 6
Record Route Label Sub object Flags:
TE Link Label, Delegation Label IANA manages the "Record Route Object Sub object Flags" registry as part of the "Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic Engineering (RSVP  TE)
Parameters" registry located at <http://www.iana.org/assignments/ rsvp te parameters
Prior to this document, this registry did not include Label Sub object Flags.
This document creates the addition of a new subregistry for Label Sub object Flags as shown below.
Error Codes and Error Values
IANA maintains a registry called "Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) Parameters" with a subregistry called "Error Codes and Globally Defined Error Value Sub Codes".
Within this subregistry is a definition of the "Routing Problem" Error Code (24).
The definition lists a number of error values that may be used with this error code.
IANA has allocated further error values for use with this Error Code as described in this document.
The resulting entry in the registry is as follows.
This document does not introduce new security issues.
The security considerations pertaining to the original RSVP protocol [RFC2205] and RSVP TE [RFC3209] and those that are described in [RFC5920] remain relevant.
The following individuals contributed to this document: Raveendra Torvi Juniper Networks Email:
rtorvi@juniper.net Chandra Ramachandran Juniper Networks Email:
