Abstract This document serves to register and document the standard MIME types associated with the 3GPP multimedia file format, which is part of the family based on the ISO Media File Format.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [RFC2119].
The third generation partnership project (3GPP) for third generation cellular telephony has defined a standard file format to contain audio/visual sequences which may be downloaded to cellular phones [3GPP].
At the time of writing, the 3GPP file format (3GP) can contain H.263 or MPEG 4 video, and AMR Narrow band speech, AMR wide  band speech, or AAC audio, and 3GPP timed text.
Within the file, as with all files in the 'ISO' family, there is an intrinsic file type box, which identifies those specifications to which the file complies, and which players (possibly compliant with only one specification) are permitted by the content author to play the file.
This identification is through four letter 'brands'.
Files identified by the MIME [MIME1] type defined here MUST contain a brand defined in a standard issued by 3GPP that can apply to 3GPP files, in their compatible brands list.
The MIME types defined here are needed to correctly identify such files when they are served over HTTP, included in multi part documents, or used in other places where MIME types are used.
The 3GPP file format may contain audio, video, and displayable text data.
There is currently no provision for 'active' elements (such as scripts) of any kind.
Clearly it is possible to author malicious files which attempt to call for an excessively large picture size, high sampling rate audio etc.
However, clients can and usually do protect themselves against this kind of attack.
It should be noted that selected metadata fields may encompass information partly intended to protect the media against unauthorized use or distribution.
In this case, the intention is that alteration or removal of the data in the field would be treated as an offense under national agreements based on World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) treaties.
3GPP files have an extensible structure, so that it is theoretically possible that metadata fields or media formats could be defined in the future which could be used to induce particular actions on the part of the recipient, thus presenting additional security risks.
However, this type of capability is currently not supported in the referenced specification.
There is no current provision in the standards for encryption, signing, or authentication of these file formats.
This registration applies to all files defined as using the '3GP' file format and identified with a suitable brand in a 3GPP specification.
The usual file suffix for all these files is ".3gp".
Files with audio but no video
The type "audio/3gpp" may be used for files containing audio but no visual presentation (neither video nor timed text, for example).
none Ongoing work related to this registration may introduce new optional parameters.
One example area of effort may introduce a parameter that would allow for codecs in use within the MIME type to be asserted and determined without examination of the file.
Those with interests in the area should monitor registrations for updates.
Note that this MIME type is used only for files; separate types are used for real time transfer, such as for the RTP payload format for AMR audio [RFC3267].
The 3GPP organization has defined the specification, interoperability, and conformance, and conducts regular interoperability testing.
3GPP specifications are publicly accessible at the 3GPP web site, www.3gpp.org.
Applications which use this media type:
Files served under this type MUST NOT contain any visual material.
(Note that 3GPP timed text is visually presented and is considered to be visual material).
However, the file type box must occur first in the file, and MUST contain a 3GPP brand in its compatible brands list.
The type "video/3gpp" is valid for all files.
It is valid to serve an audio only file as "video/3gpp".
files are binary and should be transmitted in a suitable encoding without CR/LF conversion, 7 bit stripping etc.; base64 is a suitable encoding.
Note that this MIME type is used only for files; separate types are used for real time transfer, such as for the RTP payload formats for H.263 [RFC2429] and AMR audio [RFC3267].
The 3GPP organization has defined the specification, interoperability, and conformance, and conducts regular interoperability testing.
3GPP specifications are publicly accessible at the 3GPP web site, www.3gpp.org.
Applications which use this media type:
However, the file type box must occur first in the file, and MUST contain a 3GPP brand in its compatible brands list.
This document registers the MIME types audio/3gpp and video/3gpp, defined above.
Authors' Contact Information Roberto Castagno Nokia Mobile Phones PO Box 88, FIN 33721 Tampere (Tieteenkatu 1, FIN 33720 Tampere)
roberto.castagno@nokia.com David Singer Apple Computer,
Inc. One Infinite Loop, MS:302 3MT
1 408 974 3162 EMail:
