Abstract This document describes the registration of the MIME sub type image/tiff fx.
The encodings are defined by File Format for Internet Fax and its extensions.
This document describes the registration of the MIME sub type image/tiff fx.
The encodings are defined by File Format for Internet Fax [TIFF FX] and its extensions.
This document is a product of the IETF Internet Fax Working Group.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [REQ].
TIFF FX Definition Tag Image File Format Fax eXtended (TIFF FX),
is defined in detail by RFC 3949, "File Format for Internet Fax" [TIFF FX].
While a brief scope and feature description is provided in this section as background information, the reader is directed to the original TIFF FX specification (File Format for Internet Fax) to obtain complete feature and technical details.
This document defines a TIFF based file format specification for enabling standardized messaging based fax over the Internet.
It specifies the TIFF fields and field values required for compatibility with the existing ITU T Recommendations for Group 3 black and white, grayscale and color facsimile.
TIFF has historically been used for handling fax image files in applications such as store and forward messaging.
Implementations that support this file format specification for import/export may elect to support it as a native format.
This document recommends a TIFF file structure that is compatible with low memory and page level streaming implementations.
Unless otherwise noted, the current TIFF specification [TIFF] and selected TIFF
Technical Notes [TTN1, TTN2] are the primary references for describing TIFF and defining TIFF fields.
This document is the primary reference for defining TIFF field values for fax applications.
Some of the features of TIFF FX are:  TIFF FX is capable of describing bilevel, grayscale, palette  color, full color and mixed content image data.
TIFF FX includes a number of compression schemes that allow developers to choose the best space or time tradeoff for their applications.
TIFF FX is designed to be extensible and to evolve gracefully as new needs arise.
This document defines the image/tiff fx MIME sub type to refer to
TIFF FX Profiles J, C, L and M encoded image data and any future TIFF
FX extensions, or a subset.
The image/tiff fx content type MAY be used when black and white image data is encoded using TIFF FX Profiles S or F, or a subset, however, the image/tiff content type SHOULD be used.
Registration of Standard MIME media type image/tiff fx MIME media type name: image MIME subtype name:
: none Optional parameters: none Encoding Considerations: This media type consists of binary data.
The base64 encoding should be used on transports that cannot accommodate binary data directly.
Security considerations: TIFF FX utilizes a structure which can store image data and attributes of this image data.
The fields defined in the TIFF FX specification are of a descriptive nature and provide information that is useful to facilitate viewing and rendering of images by a recipient.
As such, the fields currently defined in the TIFF FX specification do not in themselves create additional security risks, since the fields are not used to induce any particular behavior by the recipient application.
TIFF FX has an extensible structure, so that it is theoretically possible that fields could be defined in the future which could be used to induce particular actions on the part of the recipient, thus presenting additional security risks, but this type of capability is not supported in the referenced TIFF FX specification.
Indeed, the definition of fields which would include such processing instructions is inconsistent with the goals and spirit of the TIFF FX specification.
The MIME type and file extension defined by this document MUST NOT be used to blindly select a processing program.
It is up to the implementation to determine the application (if necessary) and render the image to the user.
Interoperability considerations: The ability of implementations to handle all the defined applications (or profiles within applications) of TIFF FX may not be ubiquitous.
As a result, implementations may decode and attempt to display the encoded TIFF FX image data only to determine that the image cannot be rendered.
(Tag Image File Format Fax eXtended) is defined in: RFC 3949, "File Format for Internet Fax", February 2005, Buckley, R., Venable, D., McIntyre, L., Parsons, G., and J. Rafferty.
Applications which use this media type: Imaging, fax, messaging and multi media
Additional information: Magic number(s): II (little endian):  49 49 2A 00
): TFX Person & email address to contact for further information: Lloyd McIntyre Lloyd McIntyre@Dell.com Glenn W. Parsons gparsons@nortelnetworks.com James Rafferty
COMMON Change controller: Lloyd McIntyre 5.
Security Considerations TIFF FX utilizes a structure which can store image data and attributes of this image data.
The fields defined in the TIFF FX specification are of a descriptive nature and provide information that is useful to facilitate viewing and rendering of images by a recipient.
As such, the fields currently defined in the TIFF FX specification do not in themselves create additional security risks, since the fields are not used to induce any particular behavior by the recipient application.
TIFF FX has an extensible structure, so that it is theoretically possible that fields could be defined in the future which could be used to induce particular actions on the part of the recipient, thus presenting additional security risks, but this type of capability is not supported in the referenced TIFF FX specification.
Indeed, the definition of fields which would include such processing instructions is inconsistent with the goals and spirit of the TIFF FX specification.
The MIME type and file extension defined by this document MUST NOT be used to blindly select a processing program.
It is up to the implementation to determine the application (if necessary) and render the image to the user.
Annex A. List of edits to RFC 3250
Merged sections 2 & 3 and renumbered.
