Abstract This document describes how the "Tao of the IETF", which has been published as a series of RFCs in the past, is instead being published as a web page.
It also contains the procedure for publishing and editing that web page.
The "Tao of the IETF" ("Tao") describes the inner workings of IETF meetings and Working Groups, discusses organizations related to the IETF, and introduces the standards process.
It is not a formal IETF process document but instead an informational overview.
The Tao has traditionally been published as an RFC.
It has been published as RFCs 1391, 1539, 1718, and 3160; it is currently [RFC4677].
At the time this document is published, there is a strong desire in the IETF community to turn the Tao into a web page that can be updated more easily.
This document describes that process.
At the same time, this document formally obsoletes the last version of the Tao that was published as an RFC because the last version, RFC 4677, is no longer considered the "latest" version of the Tao: the new web page is.
This document contains the procedure agreed to by the IESG.
The Tao has traditionally been an IETF consensus document, which means that the IESG has had the final say about what the Tao contained before it was sent to the RFC Editor.
Thus, the IESG should have final say regarding what the Tao says when it is a web page.
Procedure for Publishing and Editing the Tao
The Tao is published at
The initial content for the Tao web page is based on a draft document that was meant to replace RFC 4677.
The Tao is edited by one or more people as designated by the IESG.
Suggestions for changes to the Tao are discussed on the tao discuss@ietf.org mailing list.
The editor of the Tao decides which proposed changes should be submitted to the IESG for approval.
The editor publishes the proposed changes in a version at <http://www.ietf.org/tao possible
The IESG may accept as many of the proposed changes as it wishes.
The IESG then submits the changed version to the IETF Secretariat for publication on the IETF web page at the URLs given above.
The Tao editor and the IESG should confirm that the page appears on the web site as intended.
Each version of the Tao has a visible timestamp near the beginning of the document.
All published versions are archived using URLs of the form <http://www.ietf.org/tao
>, and a list of the revisions is available at <http://www.ietf.org/tao archive/
From time to time, versions of the Tao are translated into other languages.
These translations do not represent IETF consensus and may be provided on an "as is" basis.
The issues of how translations are recorded, made available, cross referenced to versions of the Tao, and archived are outside the scope of this document and are for future study.
Proposals for How the Tao Web Page Should Be Developed During the discussion that led to this document, there were many proposals for how the Tao, as a web page, should be published and edited.
Some wanted just a web page; some wanted a web page and periodic snapshots as RFCs.
Some wanted a wiki that could be easily edited by anyone in the IETF community, with a master editor who would revert bad edits; some wanted a wiki with a more limited group of contributors.
The procedure in Section 2 above was the rough consensus of the discussion.
The Tao is available over Transport Layer Security (TLS) at <https://www.ietf.org/tao.html>.
