Abstract This document defines a YANG data model for Layer 3 network topologies.
This document introduces a YANG [RFC7950] [RFC6991] data model for Layer 3 (L3) network topologies, specifically Layer 3 Unicast.
The model allows an application to have a holistic view of the topology of a Layer 3 network, all contained in a single conceptual YANG datastore.
The data model builds on top of, and augments, the data model for network topologies defined in [RFC8345].
This document also shows how the model can be further refined to cover different Layer 3 Unicast topology types.
For this purpose, an example model is introduced that covers
This example is intended purely for illustrative purpose; we expect that a complete OSPF model will be more comprehensive and refined than the example shown in this document.
There are multiple applications for a topology data model.
A number of use cases have been defined in Section 6 of [USECASE REQS].
For example, nodes within the network can use the data model to capture their understanding of the overall network topology and expose it to a network controller.
A network controller can then use the instantiated topology data to compare and reconcile its own view of the network topology with that of the network elements that it controls.
Alternatively, nodes within the network could propagate this understanding to compare and reconcile this understanding either amongst themselves or with help of a controller.
Beyond the network element itself, a network controller might even use the data model to represent its view of the topology that it controls and expose it to applications north of itself.
The data model for Layer 3 Unicast topologies defined in this document is specified in the YANG module "ietf l3 unicast topology".
This YANG module augments the general network topology model defined in [RFC8345] with information specific to Layer 3 Unicast.
In this way, the general topology model is extended to be able to meet the needs of Layer 3 Unicast topologies.
Information that is kept in the Traffic Engineering Database (TED) will be specified in a separate model [YANG TE] and is outside the scope of this specification.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
This document defines a YANG data model and thus uses many terms defined in YANG [RFC7950] and NETCONF [RFC6241].
Some terms, such as "datastore" and "data tree", are repeated here for clarity and context.
A conceptual place to store and access information.
A datastore might be implemented, for example, using files, a database, flash memory locations, or combinations thereof.
A datastore maps to an instantiated YANG data tree (definition adopted from [RFC8342]).
An instantiated data node and the data nodes that are hierarchically contained within it.
IS IS:  Intermediate System to Intermediate System protocol LSP:  Label
Switched Path NETCONF:  Network Configuration Protocol NMDA:  Network Management Datastore Architecture
First (a link state routing protocol
) URI:  Uniform Resource Identifier TED:
YANG is a data modeling language used to model configuration data, state data, Remote Procedure Calls, and notifications for network management protocols [RFC7950].
The Layer 3 Unicast topology model is defined by YANG module "l3 unicast topology".
The relationship of this module with other YANG modules is roughly depicted in the figure below.
Overall Model Structure YANG modules "ietf network" and "ietf network topology" collectively define the basic network topology model [RFC8345].
YANG module "ietf l3 unicast topology" augments those models with additional definitions needed to represent Layer 3 Unicast topologies.
This module in turn can be augmented by YANG modules with additional definitions for specific types of Layer 3 Unicast topologies, such as OSPF and IS IS topologies.
The YANG modules "ietf network" and "ietf network topology" are designed to be used in conjunction with implementations that support the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA) defined in [RFC8342].
Accordingly, the same is true for the YANG modules that augment it.
In order to allow implementations to use the model even in cases when NMDA is not supported, companion YANG modules (that SHOULD NOT be supported by implementations that support NMDA) are defined in Appendix A. 5.
Layer 3 Unicast Topology Model Overview
The Layer 3 Unicast topology model is defined by YANG module "ietf l3 unicast topology".
Its structure is depicted in the following diagram.
The notation syntax follows [RFC8340].
For purposes of brevity, notifications are not depicted.
network types:  rw l3 unicast topology!
rw l3 topology attributes  rw name?
rw l3 node attributes  rw name?
router id  rw prefix  [prefix]
rw prefix    inet:ip prefix  rw metric?
:link:  rw l3 link attributes  rw name?
rw l3 termination point attributes  rw (termination point type)?
The module augments the original "ietf network" and "ietf network  topology" modules as follows:  A new network topology type is introduced, l3 unicast topology.
The corresponding container augments the network types of the "ietf network" module.
Additional topology attributes are introduced, defined in a grouping that augments the "network" list of the network module.
The attributes include a name for the topology and a set of flags (represented by a leaf list).
Each type of flag is represented by a separate identity.
This allows additional flags to be introduced in augmenting modules using additional identities without needing to revise this module.
Additional data objects for nodes are introduced by augmenting the "node" list of the network module.
New objects include a set of flags and a list of prefixes.
Each prefix includes an IP prefix, a metric, and a prefix specific set of flags.
Links (in the "ietf network topology" module) are augmented with a set of parameters that allow a link to be associated with a link name, another set of flags, and a link metric.
Termination points (in the "ietf network topology" module) are augmented with a choice of IP address, identifier, or name.
In addition, the module defines a set of notifications to alert clients of any events concerning links, nodes, prefixes, and termination points.
Each notification includes an indication of the type of event, the topology from which it originated, and the affected node, link, prefix, or termination point.
Also, as a convenience to applications, additional data of the affected node, link, prefix, or termination point is included.
While this makes notifications larger in volume than they need to be, it avoids the need for subsequent retrieval of context information that might have changed in the meantime.
Layer 3 Unicast Topology YANG Module
This YANG module makes reference to the following documents:
" module ietf l3 unicast topology { yang version 1.1; namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:
; description "This module defines a model for Layer 3 Unicast topologies.
IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of the code.
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/license info).
Identifies the topology type to be L3 Unicast."
The identifier will correspond to the ifIndex value of the interface, i.e., the ifIndex value of the ifEntry that represents the interface in implementations where the Interfaces Group MIB (RFC 2863) is supported."
The name can (but does not have to) correspond to an interface reference of a containing node's interface, i.e., the path name of a corresponding interface data node on the containing node reminiscent of data type interface ref defined in RFC 8343.
It should be noted that data type interface ref of RFC 8343 cannot be used directly, as this data type is used to reference an interface in a datastore of a single node in the network, not to uniquely reference interfaces across a network."
/nw:network types" { description "
Interactions with Other YANG Modules
As described in Section 4, the model defined in this document builds on top of, and augments, the YANG modules defined in [RFC8345].
Specifically, the "ietf l3 unicast topology" module augments the "ietf network" and "ietf network topology" modules.
In addition, the model makes use of data types defined in [RFC6991].
The model defined in this document is a protocol independent YANG data model with Layer 3 topology information.
It is separate from and not linked with data models that are used to configure routing protocols or routing information, e.g., "ietf routing" [RFC8022] and "ietf rib extension" [YANG RIB].
That said, the model does import a type definition from model "ietf routing types" [RFC8294].
The model complies with the requirements for the ephemeral state found in [RFC8242].
For ephemeral topology data that is server provided, the process tasked with maintaining topology information will load information from the routing process (such as OSPF) into the data model without relying on a configuration datastore.
This document registers the following namespace URIs in the "IETF XML Registry" [RFC3688]:
yang:ietf l3 unicast topology Registrant Contact: The IESG.
N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
yang:ietf l3 unicast topology state Registrant Contact: The IESG.
N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
This document registers the following YANG modules in the "YANG Module Names" registry [RFC6020]:
Name: ietf l3 unicast topology
yang:ietf l3 unicast topology Prefix: l3t
RFC 8346 Name: ietf l3 unicast topology state Namespace: urn:ietf:params:xml:
yang:ietf l3 unicast topology state Prefix:
The YANG modules specified in this document define a schema for data that is designed to be accessed via network management protocols such as NETCONF [RFC6241] or RESTCONF [RFC8040].
The lowest NETCONF layer is the secure transport layer, and the mandatory to implement secure transport is Secure Shell (SSH) [RFC6242].
The lowest RESTCONF layer is HTTPS, and the mandatory to implement secure transport is TLS [RFC5246].
The NETCONF access control model [RFC8341] provides the means to restrict access for particular NETCONF or RESTCONF users to a preconfigured subset of all available NETCONF or RESTCONF protocol operations and content.
In general, Layer 3 Unicast topologies are system controlled and provide ephemeral topology information.
In an NMDA compliant server, they are only part of <operational>, which provides read only access to clients, so they are less vulnerable.
That said, the YANG modules do in principle allow information to be configurable.
There are a number of data nodes defined in these YANG modules that are writable/creatable/deletable (i.e., config true, which is the default).
These data nodes may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
Write operations (e.g., edit config) to these data nodes without proper protection can have a negative effect on network operations.
These are the subtrees and data nodes and their sensitivity/vulnerability in the "ietf l3 unicast topology" module:
l3 topology attributes: A malicious client could attempt to sabotage the configuration of any of the contained attributes, i.e., the name or the flag data nodes.
: A malicious client could attempt to sabotage the configuration of important node attributes, such as the router id or node prefix.
l3 link attributes: A malicious client could attempt to sabotage the configuration of important link attributes, such as name, flag, and metrics of the link.
: A malicious client could attempt to sabotage the configuration information of a termination point, such as the termination point's IP address and interface name.
Appendix A.  Companion YANG Data Model for Implementations
The YANG module "ietf l3 unicast topology" defined in this document augments two modules defined in [RFC8345]:
"ietf network" and "ietf network topology".
These two modules were designed to be used in conjunction with implementations that support the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA) defined in [RFC8342].
In order to allow implementations to use the model in cases when NMDA is not supported, [RFC8345] defines two companion modules, "ietf network  state" and "ietf network topology state", that represent state models of networks and network topologies, respectively.
In order to be able to use the model for Layer 3 topologies defined in this document in conjunction with implementations not compliant with NMDA, a corresponding companion module needs to be introduced as well.
This companion module, "ietf l3 unicast topology state", mirrors "ietf l3 unicast topology".
However, the module augments "ietf network state" and "ietf network topology state" (instead of "ietf network" and "ietf network topology"), and
all of its data nodes are non configurable.
Similar considerations apply to any module that augments "ietf l3  unicast topology", such as the example module defined in Appendix B (i.e., example ospf topology).
For implementations that are not compliant with NMDA, companion modules that represent state information and that are non configurable will need to be introduced.
These modules augment "ietf l3 unicast topology state" instead of "ietf l3 unicast topology".
Companion modules for the example module defined in Appendix B are not provided (since it is just an example).
Like "ietf network state" and "ietf network topology state", "ietf l3 unicast topology" SHOULD NOT be supported by implementations that support NMDA.
The module is therefore defined in an appendix.
The definition of the module follows below.
As the structure of the module mirrors that of its underlying module, the YANG tree is not depicted separately.
file "ietf l3 unicast topology state@2018
02 26.yang" module ietf l3 unicast topology state { yang version 1.1; namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:
; description "This module defines a model for Layer 3 Unicast topology state, representing topology that either is learned or results from applying topology that has been configured per the 'ietf l3 unicast topology' model, mirroring the corresponding data nodes in this model.
This model mirrors 'ietf l3 unicast topology' but contains only read only state data.
The model is not needed when the underlying implementation infrastructure supports the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA).
IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of the code.
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/license info).
network types" { description "Introduce new network type for L3 Unicast topology"; uses l3t:l3 unicast topology type; } augment "/nw
nw s:network" { when "nw s:
; uses l3t:l3 node attributes; } augment "/nw
; uses l3t:l3 link attributes; } augment "/nw
; uses l3t:l3 unicast topology type; container prefix { description "Contains L3 prefix attributes"; uses l3t:
The model can be extended for specific Layer 3 Unicast types.
Examples include OSPF and IS IS topologies.
This appendix introduces a YANG module that defines a simple topology model for OSPF.
This module is intended to serve as an example that illustrates how the general topology model can be refined across multiple levels.
It does not constitute a full fledged OSPF topology model, which may be more comprehensive and refined than the model that is described here.
The following model shows how the Layer 3 Unicast topology model can be extended, in this case, to cover OSPF topologies.
For this purpose, a set of augmentations are introduced in a separate YANG module, "example ospf topology", whose structure is depicted in the following diagram.
As before, the notation syntax follows [RFC8340].
Note that one of the lines has been wrapped to adhere to the 72 character line limitation of RFCs.
example ospf topology augment /nw:networks
l3 unicast topology:  rw ospf!
rw ospf topology attributes  rw area
rw ospf node attributes  rw (router type)?
rw ospf link attributes augment /l3t:
ospf link attributes The module augments "ietf l3 unicast topology" as follows:  A new topology type for an OSPF topology is introduced.
Additional topology attributes are defined in a new grouping that augments l3 topology attributes of the "ietf l3 unicast topology" module.
The attributes include an OSPF area
Additional data objects for nodes are introduced by augmenting the l3 node attributes of the "ietf l3 unicast topology" module.
New objects include router type and dr interface
Links are augmented with OSPF link attributes.
In addition, the module extends notifications for events concerning Layer 3 nodes and links with OSPF attributes.
It should be noted that the model defined here represents topology and is intended as an example.
It does not define how to configure OSPF routers or interfaces.
The OSPF Topology YANG module is specified below.
As mentioned, the module is intended as an example for how the Layer 3 Unicast topology model can be extended to cover OSPF topologies, but it is not normative.
Accordingly, the module is not delimited with <CODE BEGINS> and <CODE ENDS> tags.
"Defines the OSPF topology type."; uses ospf topology type; } augment "/nw:networks
network/l3t:l3 topology attributes" { when "..
l3 node event" { description "OSPF node event"; uses ospf topology type; uses ospf node attributes; } augment "/l3t:
An Example This section contains an example of an instance data tree in JSON encoding [RFC7951].
The example instantiates "ietf l3 unicast  topology" for the topology that is depicted in the following diagram.
There are three nodes: D1, D2, and D3.
D1 has three termination points: 1 0 1, 1 2 1, and 1 3 1.
D2 has three termination points as well: 2 1 1, 2 0 1, and 2 3 1.
D3 has two termination points: 3 1 1 and 3 2 1.
In addition, there are six links, two between each pair of nodes, with one going in each direction.
A Network Topology Example The corresponding instance data tree is depicted below.
Note that some lines have been wrapped to adhere to the 72 character line limitation of RFCs.
"ietf l3 unicast topology: l3 termination point attributes": {
The model presented in this document was contributed to by more people than can be listed on the author list.
Additional contributors include:  Vishnu Pavan Beeram, Juniper  Igor Bryskin, Huawei  Ken Gray, Cisco  Aihua Guo, Huawei  Tom Nadeau, Brocade  Tony Tkacik  Aleksandr Zhdankin, Cisco
