Abstract This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) for Uniform Resource Namespace (URN) resources published by the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA).
OMA defines and manages resources that utilize this URN name model.
Management activities for these and other resource types are provided by the Open Mobile Naming Authority (OMNA).
Introduction OMA is a specification development body developing technologies for mobile devices.
This activity is supported by a membership composed of network operators, equipment vendors, content providers, and other suppliers to the mobile market.
Some of the technologies being developed by OMA need XML namespaces that are managed so that they are unique and persistent.
To assure that the uniqueness is absolute, the registration of a specific NID for use by OMA was deemed appropriate.
Therefore, a full and complete registration will follow the namespace specification process as defined in [RFC3406].
URN Specification for "oma" NID Namespace ID: The NID "oma" is requested.
18 Declared registrant of the namespace:
TPM@omaorg.org Declaration of syntactic structure: The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the "oma" NID will have the following structure:
urn:oma:{OMAresource}:{ResourceSpecificString} where the "OMAresource" is a US ASCII string that conforms to the URN syntax requirements [RFC2141] and defines a specific class of resource type.
Each resource type has a specific labeling scheme that is covered by "ResourceSpecificString", which also conforms to the naming requirements of [RFC2141].
OMA maintains a naming authority, the Open Mobile Naming Authority (OMNA), that will manage the assignment of "OMAresources" and the specific registration values assigned for each resource class.
The Open Mobile Naming Authority (OMNA) provides information on the registered resources and the registrations for each.
More information about OMNA and the registration activities and procedures to be followed are available at: http://www.openmobilealliance.org/tech/omna Identifier uniqueness considerations: The OMNA will manage resources using the "oma" NID and will be the authority for managing the resources and subsequent strings associated.
In the associated procedures, OMNA will ensure the uniqueness of the strings themselves or shall permit secondary responsibility for management of well defined sub trees.
OMA may permit use of experimental type values that will not be registered.
As a consequence, multiple users may end up using the same value for separate uses.
As experimental usage is only intended for testing purposes, this should not be a real issue.
Identifier persistence considerations: OMNA will provide clear documentation of the registered uses of the "oma" NID.
This will be structured such that each OMAresource will have a separate description and registration table.
The registration tables and information will be published and maintained by OMNA on its web site.
Process of identifier assignment: OMNA will provide procedures for registration of each type of resource that it maintains.
Each such resource may have three types of registration activities: 1) Registered values associated with OMA specs or services 2) Registration of values or sub trees to other entities 3)
Name models for use in experimental purposes Process for identifier resolution
: The namespace is not listed with an RDS; this is not relevant.
Rules for Lexical Equivalence: No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence of [RFC2141] apply.
Conformance with URN Syntax: No special considerations.
URN assignment will be handled by procedures implemented in support of OMNA activities.
The following examples are representative urns that could be assigned by OMNA.
They may not be the actual strings that would be assigned.
oma presence Defines the urn to be used for the Application Characteristic object definition for providing attributes to the Presence enabler defined in OMA.
drms:org foobar Defines the urn associated with the Digital Rights Management System
object definition allocated to foobar, which is an external organization that made request via OMNA for a drms urn.
The Open Mobile Alliance is developing a variety of application and service enablers.
Some of these enablers require that supporting information (e.g., data descriptions, attributes, etc.) be fully specified.
For proper operation, descriptions of the needed supporting information must exist and be available in a unique, reliable, and persistent manner.
These dependencies provide the basis of need for namespaces, in one form or another.
As the Open Mobile Alliance work is ongoing and covers many technical areas, the possibility of binding to various other namespace repositories has been deemed impractical.
Each object or description, as defined in OMA, could possibly be related to multiple different other namespaces, so further conflicts of association could occur.
Thus the intent is to utilize the Open Mobile Naming Authority, operated by OMA, as the naming authority for OMA defined objects and descriptions.
The objects and descriptions required for enablers produced by OMA are generally available for use by other organizations.
The Open Mobile Naming Authority will provide access and support for name requests by these organizations.
This support can be enabled in a timely and responsive fashion as new objects and descriptions are produced.
These will be enabled in a fashion similar to current OMNA support.
There are no additional security considerations other than those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.
The requested NID has been entered into the IANA registry for URN NIDs.
The update can be found at: http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn namespaces and any associated mirrors.
