Abstract This document defines an RTP Control Protocol (RTCP)
Extended Report (XR) block that allows the reporting of delay metrics for use in a range of Real time Transport Protocol (RTP) applications.
This document defines a new block type to augment those defined in [RFC3611] for use in a range of RTP applications.
The new block type supports the reporting of the mean, minimum, and maximum values of the network round trip delay between RTP interfaces in peer RTP end systems as measured, for example, using the RTCP method described in [RFC3550].
It also supports reporting of the component of the round  trip delay internal to the local RTP system.
The network metrics belong to the class of transport metrics defined in [RFC6792].
1.2.  RTCP and RTCP XR Reports
The use of RTCP for reporting is defined in [RFC3550].
[RFC3611] defined an extensible structure for reporting using an RTCP Extended Report (XR).
This document defines a new Extended Report block for use with [RFC3550] and [RFC3611].
The Performance Metrics Framework [RFC6390] provides guidance on the definition and specification of performance metrics.
The RTP Monitoring Architectures [RFC6792] provides guidelines for reporting block format using RTCP XR.
The metrics block described in this document is in accordance with the guidelines in [RFC6390] and [RFC6792].
Applicability These metrics are applicable to a range of RTP applications in which this report block would be useful, such as multimedia conferencing and streaming audio and video.
Knowledge of the round trip delay and delay characteristics can aid other receivers in sizing their receive buffers and selecting a playout delay.
The same information is also valuable to network managers in troubleshooting network and user experience issues.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
Delay Block Metrics in this block report on packet delay in the stream arriving at the RTP system.
The measurement of these metrics is made either at the receiving end of the RTP stream or at the sending end of the RTP stream.
Instances of this metrics block refer by synchronization source (SSRC) to the separate auxiliary Measurement Information block [RFC6776], which contains measurement periods (see [RFC6776], Section 4.2).
This metrics block relies on the measurement period in the Measurement Information block indicating the span of the report and SHOULD be sent in the same compound RTCP packet as the Measurement Information block.
If the measurement period is not received in the same compound RTCP packet as this metrics block, this metrics block MUST be discarded.
Delay Seconds (bit 0 31)
End System Delay Fraction (bit 0 31)
Figure 1: Report Block Structure 3.2.
Definition of Fields in Delay Metrics Report Block Block type (BT): 8 bits
A Delay Report Block is identified by the constant 16.
Interval Metric flag (I): 2 bit This field is used to indicate whether the delay metrics are Sampled, Interval or Cumulative metrics:
Interval Duration the reported value applies to the most recent measurement interval duration between successive metrics reports.
the reported value applies to the accumulation period characteristic of cumulative measurements.
the reported value is a sampled instantaneous value.
: 6 bits These bits are reserved.
They MUST be set to zero by senders and ignored by receivers (see [RFC6709], Section 4.2).
The length of this report block in 32 bit words, minus one.
For the delay block, the block length is equal to 6.
SSRC of source: 32 bits As defined in Section 4.1 of [RFC3611].
Mean Network Round Trip Delay: 32 bits
The Mean Network Round Trip Delay is the mean value of the RTP to  RTP interface round trip delay over the measurement period, expressed in units of 1/65536 seconds.
This value is typically determined using "the NTP timestamp field" in the RTCP sender report (SR) and "the last SR (LSR)
field","delay since last SR (DLSR) field" in the RTCP receiver report (RR)
(see [RFC3550], Section 6.4.1 and Figure 2).
It also can be determined using "the NTP timestamp field" in the RTCP Receiver Reference Time Report Block and "last RR (LRR) field",
"delay since last RR (DLRR) field" in the DLRR Report Block (see [RFC3611], Section 4.5).
If only one measurement of Round Trip Delay is available for the time span of the report (i.e., the measurement period) (whether Interval or Cumulative), this single value SHOULD be reported as the mean value.
If the measurement is unavailable, the value of this field with all bits set to 1 MUST be reported.
Min Network Round Trip Delay: 32 bits
The Min Network Round Trip Delay is the minimum value of the RTP  to RTP interface round trip delay over the measurement period, expressed in units of 1/65536 seconds.
This value is typically determined using the NTP timestamp field in the RTCP SR and LSR field and DLSR field in the RTCP RR.
It also can be determined using the NTP timestamp field in the RTCP Receiver Reference Time Report Block and LRR field and DLRR field in the DLRR Report Block.
If only one measurement of Round Trip Delay is available for the time span of the report (i.e., the measurement period) (whether Interval or Cumulative), this single value SHOULD be reported as the minimum value.
If the measurement is unavailable, the value of this field with all bits set to 1 MUST be reported.
Max Network Round Trip Delay: 32 bits
The Max Network Round Trip Delay is the maximum value of the RTP  to RTP interface round trip delay over the measurement period, expressed in units of 1/65536 seconds.
This value is typically determined using the NTP timestamp field in the RTCP SR and LSR field and DLSR field in the RTCP RR.
It also can be determined using the NTP timestamp field in the RTCP Receiver Reference Time Report Block and LRR field and DLRR field in the DLRR Report Block.
If only one measurement of Round Trip Delay is available for the time span of the report (i.e.,the measurement period) (whether Interval or Cumulative), this single value SHOULD be reported as the maximum value.
If the measurement is unavailable, the value of this field with all bits set to 1 MUST be reported.
End System Delay: 64 bits
The End System Delay is the internal round trip delay within the reporting endpoint, calculated using the nominal value of the jitter buffer delay plus the accumulation/encoding and decoding/ playout delay associated with the codec being used.
The value of this field is represented using a 64 bit NTP format timestamp as defined in [RFC5905], which is a 64 bit unsigned fixed point number with the integer part in the first 32 bits and the fractional part in the last 32 bits.
If the measurement is unavailable, the value of this field with all bits set to 1 MUST be reported.
SDP Signaling [RFC3611] defines the use of SDP (Session Description Protocol)
[RFC4566] for signaling the use of XR blocks.
XR blocks MAY be used without prior signaling.
SDP rtcp xr attrib Attribute Extension
This section augments the SDP [RFC4566] attribute "rtcp xr" defined in [RFC3611] by providing an additional value of "xr format" to signal the use of the report block defined in this document.
/ xr delay block xr delay block  "delay" 4.2.
When SDP is used in offer/answer context, the SDP Offer/Answer usage defined in [RFC3611] applies.
IANA Considerations New block types for RTCP XR are subject to IANA registration.
For general guidelines on IANA considerations for RTCP XR, refer to [RFC3611].
New RTCP XR Block Type Value
This document assigns the block type value 16 in the IANA "RTP Control Protocol Extended Reports (RTCP XR) Block Type Registry" to the "Delay Metrics Block".
New RTCP XR SDP Parameter
This document also registers a new parameter "delay" in the "RTP Control Protocol Extended Reports (RTCP XR) Session Description Protocol (SDP) Parameters" registry.
The contact information for the registrations is: Qin Wu (sunseawq@huawei.com)
Huawei 101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District Nanjing,
It is believed that this proposed RTCP XR report block introduces no new security considerations beyond those described in [RFC3611].
This block does not provide per packet statistics, so the risk to confidentiality documented in Section 7, paragraph 3, of [RFC3611] does not apply.
Contributors Geoff Hunt wrote the initial version of this document.
