Abstract Route Flap Damping (RFD) was first proposed to reduce BGP churn in routers.
Unfortunately, RFD was found to severely penalize sites for being well connected because topological richness amplifies the number of update messages exchanged.
Many operators have turned RFD off.
Based on experimental measurement, this document recommends adjusting a few RFD algorithmic constants and limits in order to reduce the high risks with RFD.
The result is damping a non trivial amount of long term churn without penalizing well behaved prefixes' normal convergence process.
Introduction Route Flap Damping (RFD) was first proposed (see [RIPE178] and [RFC2439]) and subsequently implemented to reduce BGP churn in routers.
Unfortunately, RFD was found to severely penalize sites for being well connected because topological richness amplifies the number of update messages exchanged, see [MAO2002].
Subsequently, many operators turned RFD off; see [RIPE378].
Based on the measurements of [PELSSER2011], [RIPE580] now recommends that RFD is usable with some changes to the parameters.
Based on the same measurements, this document recommends adjusting a few RFD algorithmic constants and limits.
The result is damping of a non  trivial amount of long term churn without penalizing well
behaved prefixes' normal convergence process.
Very few prefixes are responsible for a large amount of the BGP messages received by a router; see [HUSTON2006] and [PELSSER2011].
For example, the measurements in [PELSSER2011] showed that only 3% of the prefixes were responsible for 36% percent of the BGP messages at a router with real feeds from a Tier 1 provider and an Internet Exchange Point during a one week experiment.
Only these very frequently flapping prefixes should be damped.
The values recommended in Section 6 achieve this.
Thus, RFD can be enabled, and some churn reduced.
The goal is to, with absolutely minimal change, ameliorate the danger of current RFD implementations and use.
It is not a panacea, nor is it a deep and thorough approach to flap reduction.
It is assumed that the reader understands BGP [RFC4271] and Route Flap Damping [RFC2439].
This work is based on the measurements in the paper [PELSSER2011].
A survey of Japanese operators' use of RFD and their desires is reported in [RFD SURVEY].
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
[RFC2119] only when they appear in all upper case.
They may also appear in lower or mixed case as English words, without normative meaning.
The following RFD parameters are common to all implementations.
Some may be tuned by the operator, some not.
There is currently no consensus on a single set of default values.
Values without units specified are dimensionless constants.
Default RFD Parameters of Juniper and Cisco 4.
By turning RFD back on with the values recommended in Section 6, churn is reduced.
Moreover, with these values, prefixes going through normal convergence are generally not damped.
[PELSSER2011] estimates that, with a suppress threshold of 6,000, the BGP update rate is reduced by 19% compared to a situation without RFD enabled.
[PELSSER2011] studies the number of prefixes damped over a week between September 29, 2010 and October 6, 2010.
With this 6,000 suppress threshold, 90% fewer prefixes are damped compared to use of a 2,000 threshold.
well behaved prefixes are damped.
Setting the suppress threshold to 12,000 leads to very few damped prefixes (0.22% of the prefixes were damped with a threshold of 12,000 in the experiments in [PELSSER2011], yielding an average hourly update reduction of 11% compared to not using RFD).
the current default Suppress Threshold (2,000) is overly agressive.
Damped Prefixes vs. Churn, from [PELSSER2011] 5.
It is important to understand that the parameters shown in Table 1 and the implementation's sampling rate impose an upper bound on the penalty value, which we can call the 'computed maximum penalty'.
In addition, BGP implementations have an internal constant, which we will call the 'maximum penalty', and the current computed penalty may not exceed it.
Recommendations Use of the following values is recommended:
Router Maximum Penalty:  The internal constant for the maximum penalty value MUST be raised to at least 50,000.
In order not to break existing operational configurations, existing BGP implementations, including the examples in Table 1, SHOULD NOT change their default values.
Minimum Suppress Threshold:  Operators that want damping
that is much less destructive than the current damping, but still somewhat aggressive
, SHOULD configure the Suppress Threshold to no less than 6,000.
Conservative operators SHOULD configure the Suppress Threshold to no less than 12,000.
Implementations MAY have a test mode where the operator can see the results of a particular configuration without actually damping any prefixes.
This will allow for fine tuning of parameters without losing reachability.
It is well known that an attacker can generate false flapping to cause a victim's prefix(es) to be damped.
As the recommendations merely change parameters to more conservative values, there should be no increase in risk.
In fact, the parameter change to more conservative values should slightly mitigate the false flap attack.
