ESTABLISHING A LOCAL GUIDE FOR NETWORK
USAGE Actual experiences and experimentation with network systems and subsystems will be an important supplement to existing NIC documentation.
For this reason, MITRE, to facilitate local user access to network resources, is planning to establish a local GUIDE TO NETWORK
USAGE to supplement the Resources Notebook and other NIC documentation.
The Guide will be tailored to the needs of MITRE users and will contain information on network systems and subsystems.
(We cannot precisely define systems and subsystems at this time but as an example of what we have in mind, TENNEX at SRI is a system and NLS is a subsystem.)
The Guide will be implemented under NLS in much the same fashion as the NIC LOCATOR SYSTEM.
Information gathered that is appropriate for the NIC but not yet included will be submitted for inclusion in the NIC.
Attached is an outline of the proposed NLS files for the Guide System.
The information included in the Guide will be sufficiently detailed to enable local users who are unfamiliar with the network, its terminology, and stores of reference material to utilize resources at foreign hosts via the network.
Sites will be included in the Guide as local users gain experience with systems and subsystems located at the remote sites.
Therefore, the sites most likely to be in the Guide will be those that can be used to support MITRE projects.
We are planning to coordinate our efforts in this undertaking with a similar effort at the National Bureau of Standards.
We believe that such endeavors will result in valuable contributions to the NIC, general interest to other network users and will be made accessible to them through NLS.
The Guide should become operational during December 1971.
Any comments on proposed contents of the Guide are welcome.
Anyone wishing to cooperate in this effort should contact E. Forman at MITRE.
[ direction of Alex McKenzie.
An NLS "Site File" will be built for each site at which a resource is presently available to network users at MITRE.
Initial files will be for those sites that offer resources that are of specific interest to the local community.
A RESOURCE LOCATOR FILE will contain a table of contents of the SITE FILES and a list of the subsystems surveyed for each of these sites.
The headings in the table of contents will contain links to the corresponding online site file documents.
For each account indicate:  users  who is allowed to use this account  restrictions on use of system or subsystem with with this account  who to ask for password and ID (if the account is open to use by all, list password and allowable ID's)
link  on hand at local station?
