Abstract This document defines a YANG data model for fabric topology in data  center networks and represents one possible view of the data center fabric.
This document focuses on the data model only and does not endorse any kind of network design that could be based on the abovementioned model.
Introduction A data center (DC) network can be composed of single or multiple fabrics, which are also known as Points Of Delivery (PODs).
These fabrics may be heterogeneous due to implementation of different technologies when a DC network is upgraded or new techniques and features are rolled out.
For example, within a DC network, Fabric A may use Virtual eXtensible Local Area Network (VXLAN) while Fabric B may use VLAN.
Likewise, an existing fabric may use VXLAN while a new fabric (for example, a fabric introduced for DC upgrade and expansion) may implement a technique discussed in the NVO3 Working Group, such as Geneve [GENEVE].
The configuration and management of such DC networks with heterogeneous fabrics could result in considerable complexity.
For a DC network, a fabric can be considered as an atomic structure for management purposes.
From this point of view, the management of the DC network can be decomposed into a set of tasks to manage each fabric separately, as well as the fabric interconnections.
The advantage of this method is to make the overall management tasks flexible and easy to extend in the future.
As a basis for DC fabric management, this document defines a YANG data model [RFC6020] [RFC7950] for a possible view of the fabric  based data center topology.
To do so, it augments the generic network and network topology data models defined in [RFC8345] with information that is specific to data center fabric networks.
The model defines the generic configuration and operational state for a fabric based network topology, which can subsequently be extended by vendors with vendor specific information as needed.
The model can be used by a network controller to represent its view of the fabric topology that it controls and expose this view to network administrators or applications for DC network management.
Within the context of topology architecture defined in [RFC8345], this model can also be treated as an application of the Interface to the Routing System (I2RS) network topology model [RFC8345] in the scenario of data center network management.
It can also act as a service topology when mapping network elements at the fabric layer to elements of other topologies, such as L3 topologies as defined in [RFC8346].
By using the fabric topology model defined in this document, people can treat a fabric as a holistic entity and focus on its characteristics (such as encapsulation type and gateway type) as well as its connections to other fabrics, while putting the underlay topology aside.
As such, clients can consume the topology information at the fabric level with no need to be aware of the entire set of links and nodes in the corresponding underlay networks.
A fabric topology can be configured by a network administrator using the controller by adding physical devices and links into a fabric.
Alternatively, fabric topology can be learned from the underlay network infrastructure.
2.  Definitions and Acronyms 2.1.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
Terminology POD: a module of network, compute, storage, and application components that work together to deliver networking services.
It represents a repeatable design pattern.
Its components maximize the modularity, scalability, and manageability of data centers.
Fabric: composed of several PODs to form a data center network.
This section provides an overview of the DC fabric topology model and its relationship with other topology models.
The relationship of the DC fabric topology model and other topology models is shown in Figure 1.
The Network Data Model Structure From the perspective of resource management and service provisioning for a data center network, the fabric topology model augments the basic network topology model with definitions and features specific to a DC fabric, to provide common configuration and operations for heterogeneous fabrics.
The fabric topology model module is designed to be generic and can be applied to data center fabrics built with different technologies, such as VLAN and VXLAN.
The main purpose of this module is to configure and manage fabrics and their connections.
It provides a fabric based topology view for data center applications.
In the fabric topology module, a fabric is modeled as a node of a network; as such, the fabric based data center network consists of a set of fabric nodes and their connections.
The following depicts a snippet of the definitions to show the main structure of the model.
The notation syntax follows [RFC8340].
module: ietf dc fabric topology augment
network types:  rw fabric network!
rw fabric attributes  rw fabric
fabrictype:underlay network type  rw description?
ro fport attributes  ro name?
fabric port role  ro type?
The fabric topology module augments the generic ietf network and ietf network topology modules as follows:  A new topology type, "ietf dc fabric topology", is defined and added under the "network types" container of the ietf network module.
Fabric is defined as a node under the network/node container.
A new container, "fabric attributes", is defined to carry attributes for a fabric such as gateway mode, fabric types, involved device nodes, and links.
Termination points (in the network topology module) are augmented with fabric port attributes defined in a container.
The "termination point" here is used to represent a fabric "port" that provides connections to other nodes, such as an internal device, another fabric externally, or end hosts.
Details of the fabric node and the fabric termination point extension will be explained in the following sections.
As an atomic network (that is, a set of nodes and links that composes a POD and also supports a single overlay/underlay instance), a fabric itself is composed of a set of network elements, i.e., devices and related links.
The configuration of a fabric is contained under the "fabric attributes" container depicted as follows.
The notation syntax follows [RFC8340].
rw fabric attributes  rw fabric
fabrictype:underlay network type  rw vni capacity
link ref  rw device ports
tp ref  rw port type?
bandwidth In the module, additional data objects for fabric nodes are introduced by augmenting the "node" list of the network module.
New objects include fabric name, type of the fabric, and descriptions of the fabric, as well as a set of options defined in an "options" container.
The "options" container includes the gateway mode type (centralized or distributed) and traffic behavior (whether an Access Control List (ACL) is needed for the traffic).
Also, it includes a list of device nodes and related links as "supporting node" to form a fabric network.
These device nodes and links are represented as leaf refs of existing nodes and links in the underlay topology.
For the device node, the "role" object is defined to represent the role of a device within the fabric, such as "SPINE" or "LEAF", which should work together with the gateway mode.
Since a fabric can be considered as a node, "termination points" can represent fabric "ports" that connect to other fabrics and end hosts, as well as devices inside the fabric.
As such, the set of "termination points" of a fabric indicate all of its connections, including its internal connections, interconnections with other fabrics, and connections to end hosts.
The structure of fabric ports is as follows.
The notation syntax follows [RFC8340].
ro fport attributes  ro name?
fabric port role  ro type?
tp ref  ro (tunnel option)?
This structure augments the termination points (in the network topology module) with fabric port attributes defined in a container.
New nodes are defined for fabric ports, including fabric name, role of the port within the fabric (internal port, external port to outside network, access port to end hosts), and port type (L2 interface, L3 interface).
By defining the device port as a tp ref, a fabric port can be mapped to a device node in the underlay network.
Additionally, a new container for tunnel options is introduced to present the tunnel configuration on a port.
The termination point information is learned from the underlay networks, not configured by the fabric topology layer.
This module imports typedefs from [RFC8345], and it references [RFC7348] and [RFC8344].
<CODE BEGINS> file "ietf dc fabric types@2019 02 25.yang" module ietf dc fabric types { yang version 1.1; namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:
Danian Shi <mailto:shidanian@huawei.com>"; description "
This module contains a collection of YANG definitions for fabric.
2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of the code.
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/license info).
This identifier can be generated when composing a fabric.
The composition of a fabric can be achieved by defining an RPC, which is left for vendor specific implementation and not provided in this model."
file "ietf dc fabric topology@2019
02 25.yang" module ietf dc fabric topology { yang version 1.1; namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:
Danian Shi <mailto:shidanian@huawei.com>"; description "
This module contains a collection of YANG definitions for fabric.
2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of the code.
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/license info).
The Fabric uses centralized gateway, in which gateway is deployed on SPINE node."
The service capabilities is defined as identity ref.
It is a list of device roles to represent the roles that a device plays within a POD, such as SPINE, LEAF, Border, or Border Leaf.
The device role is defined as identity ref.
The current types include ethernet or serial.
It is defined as identity ref.
If more speeds are introduced, developers can define new identities for them.
An identifier for a fabric in a topology.
This identifier can be generated when composing a fabric.
Examples are VLAN and TRILL."
/nw:network types" { description "Introduce a new network type for fabric based topology"; uses fabric network type; } augment "/nw:networks
This document registers the following namespace URIs in the "IETF XML Registry" [RFC3688]:
N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
yang:ietf dc fabric topology Registrant Contact: The IESG.
N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
yang:ietf dc fabric topology state Registrant Contact: The IESG.
N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
This document registers the following YANG modules in the "YANG Module Names" registry [RFC6020]:
Name: ietf dc fabric types
yang:ietf dc fabric types Prefix:
RFC 8542 Name: ietf dc fabric topology
yang:ietf dc fabric topology Prefix
yang:ietf dc fabric topology state Prefix:
sfabric Reference: RFC 8542 6.
The YANG module defined in this document is designed to be accessed via network management protocols such as NETCONF [RFC6241] or RESTCONF [RFC8040].
The lowest NETCONF layer is the secure transport layer, and the mandatory to implement secure transport is Secure Shell (SSH) [RFC6242].
The lowest RESTCONF layer is HTTPS, and the mandatory to implement secure transport is TLS [RFC8446].
The Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM)
[RFC8341] provides the means to restrict access for particular NETCONF or RESTCONF users to a preconfigured subset of all available NETCONF or RESTCONF protocol operations and content.
There are a number of data nodes defined in this YANG module that are writable/creatable/deletable (i.e., config true, which is the default).
These data nodes may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
Write operations (e.g., edit config) to these data nodes without proper protection can have a negative effect on network operations.
The subtrees and data nodes and
their sensitivity/vulnerability in the ietf dc fabric topology module are as follows:
A malicious client could attempt to sabotage the configuration of important fabric attributes, such as device nodes or type.
Some of the readable data nodes in this YANG module may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
It is thus important to control
read access (e.g., via get, get config, or notification) to these data nodes.
The subtrees and data nodes and
their sensitivity/vulnerability in the ietf dc fabric topology module are as follows:
fport attributes: A malicious client could attempt to read the connections of fabrics without permission, such as device port and name.
The YANG module, ietf dc fabric topology, defined in this document augments two modules, ietf network and ietf network topology, that are designed to be used in conjunction with implementations that support the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA) defined in [RFC8342].
In order to allow implementations to use the model even in cases when NMDA is not supported, a set of companion modules have been defined that represent a state model of networks and network topologies: ietf network state and ietf network topology  state, respectively.
In order to be able to use the model for fabric topologies defined in this document in conjunction with non NMDA compliant implementations, a corresponding companion module needs to be introduced as well.
This companion module, ietf dc fabric topology state, mirrors ietf  dc fabric topology.
However, the ietf dc fabric topology state module augments ietf network state (instead of ietf network and ietf  network topology), and all of its data nodes are non configurable.
Like ietf network state and ietf network topology state, ietf dc
fabric topology state SHOULD NOT be supported by implementations that support NMDA.
It is for this reason that the module is defined in the Appendix.
The definition of the module follows.
As the structure of the module mirrors that of its underlying module, the YANG tree is not depicted separately.
> file "ietf dc fabric topology state@2019 02 25.yang" module ietf dc fabric topology state { yang version 1.1; namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:
Danian Shi <mailto:shidanian@huawei.com>"; description "
This module contains a collection of YANG definitions for fabric state, representing topology that either is learned or results from applying topology that has been configured per the ietf dc fabric topology model, mirroring the corresponding data nodes in this model.
This model mirrors the configuration tree of ietf dc fabric
topology but contains only read only state data.
The model is not needed when the implementation infrastructure supports the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA).
2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of the code.
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/license info).
The fabric uses centralized gateway, in which gateway is deployed on SPINE node."
The service capabilities is defined as identity ref.
It is a list of device roles to represent the roles that a device plays within a POD, such as SPINE, LEAF, Border, or Border Leaf.
The device role is defined as identity ref.
The current types include ethernet or serial.
It is defined as identity ref.
If more speeds are introduced, developers can define new identities for them.
Examples are VLAN and TRILL."
network/nws:network types" { description "Introduce a new network type for fabric based logical topology"; uses fabric network type; } augment "/nws:networks/nws:
