Abstract This document updates the registration guidance provided in Section 4.2 of RFC 5031, which allows the registration of service URNs with the 'sos' service type only for emergency services "that are offered widely and in different countries".
This document updates those instructions to allow such registrations when, at the time of registration, those services are offered in only one country.
The advice to experts for registering sub services of the service URN with the 'sos' service type is provided in Section 4.2 of RFC 5031
: The 'sos' service type describes emergency services requiring an immediate response, typically offered by various branches of the government or other public institutions.
Additional sub services can be added after expert review and must be of general public interest and have a similar emergency nature.
The expert is designated by the ECRIT working group, its successor, or, in their absence, the IESG.
The expert review should only approve emergency services that are offered widely and in different countries, with approximately the same caller expectation in terms of services rendered.
The 'sos' service is not meant to invoke general government, public information, counseling, or social services.
Some existing emergency services are, at least initially, offered in only one country.
Examples are the "Reporting spies" emergency service offered in South Korea and the "GAULA (anti kidnapping)" emergency service offered in Colombia according to [WIKIPEDIA].
Future emergency service might also initially be introduced in only one country.
The advice to experts of sub services of the service URN with the 'sos' service type provided in RFC 5031
[RFC5031] prevents the registration of a sub service of the service URN with the 'sos' service type for a service that, at the time of registration, is offered in one country only.
This document updates the 2nd paragraph of Section 4.2 of RFC 5031
[RFC5031], in order to allow the registration of service URNs with the 'sos' service type for emergency services that, at the time of registration, are offered in one country only.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [RFC2119].
Update to RFC 5031 3.1.
General Section 3.2 of this document replaces the text of the 2nd paragraph of Section 4.2 (Sub Services for the 'sos' Service) of RFC 5031 [RFC5031].
New Text Replacing the Text of the 2nd Paragraph of Section 4.2 of RFC 5031
The 'sos' service type describes emergency services requiring an immediate response, typically offered by various branches of the government or other public institutions.
Additional sub services can be added after expert review.
The expert is designated by the ECRIT working group, its successor, or, in their absence, the IESG.
The designated expert should only approve services that are to be used for emergency purposes, that are offered in at least one country, that do not match the description of any existing service URN with the 'sos' service type, and where the service description and the URN are defined as broadly as possible to encourage reuse.
The 'sos' service is not meant to invoke general government, public information, counseling, or social services.
This document updates the advice to the expert of the "'sos' Sub  Services" registry.
IANA has updated the reference for that registry <http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn serviceid labels> to point to this document (instead of RFC 5031 [RFC5031]).
This document does not update the Security Considerations of RFC 5031.
