Abstract This document relaxes the IANA rules for the Protocol for Carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA).
This document relaxes the IANA rules for the Protocol for Carrying Authentication for Network Access (PANA)
Rules for the following protocol fields, all defined in [RFC5191], are affected:  Message Types  Message Flags  Attribute Value Pair (AVP) Flags
The rationale for this update is that there can be situations in which it makes sense to grant an allocation under special circumstances.
At the time of this writing, the IETF is in the process of approving one such allocation.
By changing the current IANA rules to allow for IESG Approval [RFC5226] as well, it has become possible for the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) to consider an allocation request, even if it does not fulfill the default rule.
For instance, an experimental protocol extension could perhaps deserve an allocation from a field of reserved bits, as long as a sufficient number of bits still remain for other purposes, and the PANA community is happy with such allocation.
IANA Considerations IANA has updated the registries related to PANA Message Types, Message Flags, AVP Flags, Result Code AVP Values, and Termination  Cause AVP Values, as specified below.
All other PANA IANA registries are to remain unchanged.
The Message Types namespace is used to identify PANA messages.
Value 0 is not used and is not assigned by IANA.
The range of values from 1 65,519 are for permanent, standard Message Types, allocated by IETF Review or IESG Approval
Previously, the rule for this range was allocation by IETF Review only.
[RFC5191] defined the range of values from 1 4.
The same Message Type is used for both the request and the answer messages, except for type 1.
The Request bit distinguishes requests from answers.
The range of values from 65,520 65,535 (hexadecimal values 0xfff0 0xffff) is reserved for experimental messages.
As these codes are only for experimental and testing purposes, no guarantee is made for interoperability between the communicating PANA Client (PaC) and PANA Authentication Agent (PAA) using experimental commands, as outlined in [RFC3692].
There are 16 bits in the Flags field of the PANA message header.
Section 6.2 of [RFC5191] assigned bit 0
('R'), 1 ('S'), 2 ('C'), 3 (
'A'), 4 ('P'), and 5 (
Allocations from the remaining free bits in the PANA header Flag field are made via Standards Action or IESG Approval
Previously, the rule for these bits was allocation by Standards Action only.
There are 16 bits in the AVP Flags field of the AVP header, defined in Section 6.3 of [RFC5191].
That RFC also assigned bit 0 ('V').
The remaining bits are assigned via Standards Action or IESG Approval
Previously, the rule for these bits was allocation by Standards Action only.
As defined in Section 8.7 of [RFC5191], the Result Code AVP (AVP Code 7) defines the values from 0 2.
All remaining values are available for assignment via IETF Review or IESG Approval
Previously, the rule for these values was allocation by IETF Review only.
Termination Cause AVP Values As defined in Section 8.9 of [RFC5191],
the Termination Cause AVP (AVP Code 9) defines the values 1, 4, and 8.
All remaining values are available for assignment via IETF Review or IESG Approval
Previously, the rule for these values was allocation by IETF Review only.
This specification does not change the security properties of PANA.
However, a few words are necessary about the use of the experimental code points defined in Section 2.1.
Potentially harmful side effects from the use of the experimental values need to be carefully evaluated before deploying any experiment across networks that the owner of the experiment does not entirely control.
Guidance given in [RFC3692] about the use of experimental values needs to be followed.
Appendix A.  Changes from RFC 5191
This document changes the IANA rules for: Message Types, Message Flags, AVP Flags, Result Code AVP Values, and Termination Cause AVP Values.
