Abstract This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace that is engineered by the TV Anytime Forum for naming persistent resources published by the TV Anytime Forum including the TV Anytime Forum Standards, XML (Extensible Markup Language)
Document Type Definitions, XML Schemas, Namespaces, and other documents.
The TV Anytime Forum produces many kinds of documents (i.e., specifications, working documents, and schemas) that are currently being considered for adoption by many standardization bodies such as ETSI (European Telecommunication Standardization Institute), DVB (Digital Video Broadcasting), ARIB (Association of Radio Industries and Businesses), and ATSC (Advance Television Systems Committee).
The TV Anytime Forum wishes to provide global, distributed, persistent, location independent names for these resources.
Registration Version Number: 1 Registration Date: 2005 1 6
Declared registrant of the namespace:
Okuboyama, Nishi tomida, Honjo shi, Saitama 367 0035,
The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs assigned by the TV
Anytime Forum will have the following hierarchical structure:
urn:tva:{category}:{string} where the "category" is a US ASCII string that conforms to URN syntax requirements ([RFC2141]), and "{string}" is a string that confirms to URN syntax requirements ([RFC2141]).
The TV Anytime Forum specifications have been publicly available at all stages during their development from "ftp://tva:tva@ftp.bbc.co.uk/Specifications/".
The final specifications are also available as formal ETSI (European Telecommunication Standardization Institute) technical specification documents, ETSI TS 102 822 series.
: The TV Anytime Forum shall establish unique identifiers as appropriate.
Uniqueness is guaranteed as long as the assigned "{category}" is never reassigned for other categories.
Anytime Forum is responsible for this.
Identifier persistence considerations: The TV Anytime Forum is committed to maintaining the accessibility and persistence of all resources that are officially assigned URNs by the organization.
Persistence of identifiers is dependent upon suitable delegation at the level of "category"s, and persistence of category assignment.
Process of identifier assignment: All the assignments of identifiers are fully controlled and managed by the TV Anytime Forum.
Process of identifier resolution: The namespace is not listed with an RDS; this is not relevant.
Rules for Lexical Equivalence: The "{category}" is case insensitive.
Thus, the portion of the URN: urn:tva:{category}: is case insensitive for matches.
The remainder of the identifier shall be considered case sensitive; hence, URNs are only lexically equivalent if they are also lexically identical in the remaining {string} field.
Conformance with URN Syntax: No special considerations.
Validation mechanism: Validation shall be done by a syntax grammar corresponding to each "{category}".
The following examples are not guaranteed to be real.
They are provided for pedagogical reasons only.
The names in this namespace are to be used in any public implementations of the TV Anytime Forum specifications so that anybody can benefit from the officially assigned namespace.
Potential beneficiary communities include: a) Implementers of the TV Anytime specifications.
Resources that comply with the TV Anytime Forum specifications (including TV Anytime schemas, instance documents that comply with TV Anytime schemas, and TV Anytime default Classification Schemes) may, by means of the registered namespace, become exposed to the general Internet and gain from the interoperability benefits of the Internet at large.
b) Implementers of other specifications that incorporate components of the TV Anytime specifications.
URNs used to identify TV Anytime components may be used to enable their inclusion in, and enhancement of, other specifications while maintaining, to a certain degree, interoperability with the TV
Anytime community (see a) above).
c) Implementers of other semantically related specifications that do not directly incorporate components of the TV Anytime specifications.
URNs used to identify components of the TV Anytime specifications, such as identifiers of terms within default Classification Schemes, may enable interoperation with other semantically determined specifications (including present and future metadata/resource description and ontology specifications) of relevance to TV Anytime implementation communities (see a) and b) above).
This application requires a unique namespace because the assignment mechanism requires delegation to the TV Anytime Forum.
As a namespace used to identify components of the TV Anytime specifications, the TV Anytime Forum will manage the inter  relationship of the components and the uniqueness of the identifiers.
There are no additional security considerations other than those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.
