Abstract This document defines a convention for encapsulating Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
[1] packets over the transport mechanism provided via the Internetwork Packet Exchange (IPX) protocol [2].
Introduction The Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) as defined in [1] is now used as an integral part of the network management framework for TCP/IP based internets.
Together with its companion standards, which define the Structure of Management Information (SMI)
[3,4], and the Management Information Base (MIB) [5], the SNMP has received widespread deployment in many operational networks running the Internet suite of protocols.
The success of SNMP in the TCP/IP environment has led to its deployment in non TCP/IP based internets.
This specification describes the mapping of SNMP onto the Internetwork Packet Exchange (IPX) protocol [2] used in Novell NetWare environments.
As noted in [6], the preferred mapping for SNMP is onto UDP [7].
As such, this specification is intended for use in environments where UDP transport is not available.
No aspect of this specification should be construed as a suggestion that, in a heterogeneous transport environment, a managed agent should support more than one mapping.
Conversely, management stations are strongly encouraged to support mappings of SNMP onto all popular transports.
Mapping SNMP onto IPX Mapping SNMP onto IPX is straight forward since IPX provides a datagram service very similar to that provided by IP/UDP.
Although modifications have been made elsewhere in the NetWare protocol suite, IPX is identical to the Xerox Internet Datagram Protocol (IDP)
The socket address space authority is administered by Novell.
SNMP packets will always set the Packet Type field in the IPX header to 4 (i.e., Packet Exchange Packet).
2.1  Socket Assignments SNMP protocol entities will receive GetRequest PDU, GetNextRequest  PDU, and SetRequest PDU messages on socket 36879 (Destination Socket field set to hexadecimal 900F), and Trap PDU messages on socket 36880 (Destination Socket field set to hexadecimal 9010).
GetResponse PDU messages will be addressed to the IPX address and socket from which the corresponding GetRequest PDU, GetNextRequest  PDU, or
When SNMP traps are sent over IPX, the agent addr field in the Trap
PDU contains the IP address "0.0.0.0".
An SNMP manager may ascertain the source of the trap based on information provided by the transport service 2.3  Maximum Message Size
Although SNMP does not require conformant implementations to accept messages whose length exceeds 484 bytes, it is recommended that implementations support a maximum SNMP message size of 546 bytes (the maximum size allowed under IPX).
Furthermore, this limit is the maximum packet length guaranteed to traverse IPX routers which do not provide fragmentation.
Implementors may choose to use longer packet lengths if the maximum is known, which depends on the intermediate routers and/or intermediate datalink layer protocols.
This section provides contact points for procurement of selected documents.
A complete description of IPX may be secured at the following address: Novell, Inc. 122 East 1700 South P. O. Box 5900
Provo, Utah 84601 USA 800
The specification for IDP (part of XNS) may be ordered from: Xerox System Institute 475 Oakmead Parkway Sunnyvale, CA 94086
Fonda Pallone (415) 813 7164 6.
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
