IMAP4 non synchronizing literals 1.
The Internet Message Access Protocol [IMAP4] contains the "literal" syntactic construct for communicating strings.
When sending a literal from client to server, IMAP4 requires the client to wait for the server to send a command continuation request between sending the octet count and the string data.
This document specifies an alternate form of literal which does not require this network round trip.
Conventions Used in this Document
In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and server respectively.
The non synchronizing literal is added an alternate form of literal, and may appear in communication from client to server instead of the IMAP4 form of literal.
The IMAP4 form of literal, used in communication from client to server, is referred to as a synchronizing literal.
Non synchronizing literals may be used with any IMAP4 server implementation which returns "LITERAL " as one of the supported capabilities to the CAPABILITY command.
If the server does not advertise the LITERAL  capability, the client must use synchronizing literals instead.
The server does not generate a command continuation request in response to a non synchronizing literal, and clients are not required to wait before sending the octets of a non  synchronizing literal.
If it finds this sequence, it is the octet count of a non  synchronizing literal and the server MUST treat the specified number of following octets and the following line as part of the same command.
A server MAY still process commands and reject errors on a line by line basis, as long as it checks for non synchronizing literals at the end of each line.
A001 LOGIN {11 } C:
FRED FOOBAR {7 } C: fat man
A001 OK LOGIN completed 4.
The following syntax specification uses the augmented Backus Naur Form (BNF) notation as specified in [RFC 822] as modified by [IMAP4].
Non terminals referenced but not defined below are as defined by [IMAP4].
There are no known security issues with this extension.
