(NIC #37435) STANDARD FOR THE FORMAT OF ARPA NETWORK TEXT
21 November 1977 by David H. Crocker
The Rand Corporation John J. Vittal Bolt Beranek and
Newman Inc. Kenneth T. Pogran Massachusets Institute of Technology D. Austin Henderson, Jr.(2)
the  Defense  Advanced  Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defense, under contract Nos.
C 0661, MDA903 76 C 0212, and DAHC15 73 C0181.
D.  Crocker,  The  Rand Corporation,  Information  Sciences  Dept.,  1700 Main St., Santa Monica, California 90406;
MIT  Laboratory  for  Computer   Science
,   545 PREFACE ARPA's  Committee  on  Computer Aided
Human   Communication (CAHCOM)  wishes  to promulgate a standard for the format of ARPA Network text message (mail) headers which  will  reasonably  meet the  needs  of
the  various  message  service  subsystems on the Network today.
The  authors  of  this  document  constitute  the CAHCOM  subcommittee charged with the task of developing this new standard.
Essentially, we specify a revision to  ARPANET
Request  for Comments (RFC) 561, "Standardizing Network Mail Headers", and RFC 680, "Message Transmission Protocol".
This revision removes  and compacts  portions  of  the  previous  syntax  and  adds  several features to network address  specification.
In  particular,  we focus  on  people  and  not  mailboxes  as  recipients  and allow reference to stored address lists.
We  expect  this  syntax  to provide  sufficient  capabilities  to  meet most users' immediate needs and, therefore, give developers enough  breathing  room  to produce  a new mail transmission protocol "properly".
We believe that there is enough of a consensus in the Network  community  in favor  of such a standard syntax to make possible its adoption at this time.
An earlier draft of this specification was  published as  RFC  #724,
"Proposed Official Standard for the Format of ARPA Network Messages"  and  contained  extensive  discussion  of  the background and issues in ARPANET mail standards.
This specification was developed  over  the  course  of  one year,  using  the ARPANET mail environment, itself, to provide an on going forum for discussing the capabilities  to  be  included.
More   than   twenty   individuals,   from  across  the  country, participated in this discussion and we would like to
The  syntax  of  the standard was originally specified in the Backus Naur Form (BNF) meta language.
Ken  L.   Harrenstien,  of SRI International, was responsible for re coding the BNF  into
which  compacts  the CONTENTS PREFACE
This standard specifies a syntax for text messages which are passed between computer users within the framework of "electronic mail".
The standard supersedes the informal standards  specified in  ARPANET
Request  for  Comments  numbers  561, "Standardizing Network Mail Headers", and 680, "Message Transmission  Protocol".
In  this  document,  a  general framework is first described; the formal syntax is then specified, followed by a discussion of  the semantics.
Finally, a number of examples are given.
This specification is intended strictly as a  definition  of what  is  to
be  passed between hosts on the ARPANET.
It is NOT intended to dictate either features
which systems on the  Network are  expected  to support, or user interfaces to message creating or reading programs.
A distinction should be made between what the  specification REQUIRES  and  what  it ALLOWS.
Messages can be made complex and rich with formally structured components of information or can be kept small and simple, with a minimum of such information.
Also, the standard simplifies the interpretation  of  differing  visual formats in messages.
These simplifications facilitate the formal specification and indicate what the OFFICIAL  semantics  are  for messages.
Only  the  visual aspect of a message is affected and not the interpretation of information  within  it.
Implementors may choose to retain such visual distinctions.
Since there are many message systems which exist outside the ARPANET environment, as well as those within it, it may be useful to consider the general framework, and resulting capabilities and limitations, provided by this standard.
Messages are expected to  consist  of  lines  of  text.
No special provisions are made, at this time, for encoding drawings, facsimile, speech, or structured text.
No significant consideration has been given to questions  of data   compression   or   transmission/storage  efficiency.
The standard, in fact, tends to be very free with the number of  bits consumed.
For  example, field names are specified as free text, rather than special terse codes.
A general "memo" framework is  used.
a  message consists  of some information, in a rigid format, followed by the main part of the message, which is text and whose format
is  not specified  in this document.
The syntax of several fields of the rigidly formated  ("header")
section   is   defined   in   this specification;  some of the header fields must be included in all messages.
The syntax  which  distinguishes  between  headers  is specified  separately  from  the  internal  syntax for particular headers.
This separation is intended to allow  extremely  simple parsers  to operate on the overall structure of messages, without concern  for
the  detailed  structure  of  individual   headers.
Appendix B is provided to facilitate construction of these simple parsers.
In addition to the fields specified in  this  document, it  is
expected  that  other fields will gain common use.
User  defined header fields allow systems to extend their functionality while  maintaining  a uniform framework.
The approach is similar to that of the TELNET protocol,  in  that
a  basic  standard  is defined  which  includes  a  mechanism for (optionally) extending itself.
As necessary, the authors of this document will regulate the  publishing  of  specifications for these "extension fields", through the same mechanisms used to publish this document.
Such a  framework  severely  constrains
tone  and appearance  and  is  primarily useful for most intra organization communications  and  relatively   structured   inter organization communication.
A more robust environment might allow for multi  font, multi color, multi dimension encoding  of  information.
A less  robust  environment,  as  is present in most single machine RECEIVER  of  a  message  can exercise an extraordinary amount of control over the message's  appearance.
The  amount  of  actual III.
This  syntax  is  given  in  five  parts.
The  first  part describes  the  notation  used  in the specification.
The second part describes the base level lexical analyzers  which  feed  the higher level  parser  described  in the succeeding sections.
The third part gives a  general  syntax  for  messages  and  standard header  fields;  and  the  fourth  part  specifies
some  general  syntax  which supports the other sections.
These specifications are made in an  augmented  Backus Naur  Form (BNF).
Differences  from  standard  BNF  involve  the  naming of rules, the indication of repetition and of "local" alternatives.
The name  of a   rule  is  simply  the  name  itself,  rather  than
Quotation marks enclose literal text (which may be  upper  and/or lower case).
Certain basic  rules  are  in  uppercase,
such  as SPACE,  TAB, CRLF, DIGIT, ALPHA, etc.
Angle brackets are used in rule definitions, and in the  rest  of  this  document,  whenever their presence will facilitate discerning the use of rule names.
Local alternatives Elements enclosed in parentheses are treated as a single element.
The full form is: <l> <m
at least <l> and at most <m> occurrences  of  element.
<number>element "<n>(element)" is  equivalent  to  "
";  that  is, exactly  <n>
Thus 2DIGIT is a 2 digit number, and 3ALPHA is a string of three alphabetic characters.
# construct:  Lists A construct "
Wherever this construct is used, null elements are allowed, but do not  contribute  to  the  count  of  elements present.
is  permitted,  but counts as only two  elements.
Therefore,  where  at  least  one element  is  required,  at  least  one  non null  element must be present.
is equivalent to " 1(foo bar)".
; Comments A semi colon, set off some distance to the right  of  rule  text, starts  a  comment which continues to the end of line.
This is a simple way  of  including
B.  LEXICAL ANALYSIS OF MESSAGES 1.
General Description A message consists of headers and, optionally,  a  body  (i.e.  a series of text lines).
The text part is just a sequence of lines B. Lexical Analysis a.  Folding and unfolding of headers Each header item can be viewed as a single, logical  line  of ASCII characters.
The general rule is that wherever there can be linear white space
(NOT  simply  LWSP  chars), a CRLF immediately followed by AT LEAST one LWSP char can instead be inserted.
Thus, the single line To:  "Joe Dokes & J. Harvey" <ddd at Host>, JJV at BBN can be represented as To:  "Joe Dokes & J. Harvey"
>, JJV at BBN and To:  "Joe Dokes & J. Harvey" <ddd at Host
>, JJV at BBN and To:  "Joe Dokes & J. Harvey" <ddd at Host
The  process  of  moving  from
this   folded   multiple line representation   of   a  header
to  its  single  line representation will  be  called  "unfolding".
Unfolding  is accomplished  by  regarding  CRLF  immediately  followed by a LWSP char as equivalent  to  the  LWSP char.
The field name must be composed of printable  ASCII  characters  (i.e.,  characters  which  have values between 33.
,  decimal,  except  colon)  and LWSP chars.
may  be  composed of any ASCII characters (other than  an  unquoted  CRLF,  which  has  been removed by unfolding).
Certain field bodies of  header  fields
may  be  interpreted B. Lexical Analysis addresses.
Other fields, such as "Subject"  and  "Comments", are regarded simply as strings of text.
NOTE:  Field names, unstructured field bodies and  structured field
each  are  scanned  by  their own, INDEPENDENT "lexical" analyzer.
Field names To aid in the creation and reading of field names,
LWSP chars  is  allowed in  reasonable places.
Rather than obscuring the syntax specification for field name with  the explicit syntax for these LWSP chars, the existence of a "lexical" analyzer is assumed.
The analyzer  interprets the  text  which  comprises  the  field name as a sequence of field name atoms (fnatoms) separated by
LWSP chars Note that ONLY LWSP chars may occur between the fnatoms of  a field name and that CRLFs may NOT.
In addition, comments are NOT lexically recognized, as such, but parenthesized  strings are  legal  as  part  of  field names.
These constraints are different from what is permissible  within  structured  field bodies.
In  particular,  this means that header field names must wholly occur on the FIRST line of a folded  header  item and may NOT be split across two or more lines.
Unstructured field bodies For  some  fields,
such  as  "Subject"  and  "Comments",  no structuring is assumed; and they are treated simply as texts, like those in the message body.
Rules of  folding  apply  to these  fields, so that such field bodies which occupy several lines must therefore have the  second  and  successive  lines indented by at least one LWSP char.
e.  Structured field bodies To aid in the creation and reading of structured fields,
the free  insertion  of linear white space (which permits folding by inclusion of  CRLFs)
is  allowed  in  reasonable  places.
Rather  than  obscuring  the  syntax specifications for these structured fields  with
this  linear  white space,  the  existence of another "lexical" analyzer is assumed.
This analyzer does not apply for field bodies which are  simply unstructured strings of text, as described above.
It provides an interpretation of the unfolded text comprising the  body  of  the  field  as  a sequence of lexical symbols.
These symbols are: B. Lexical Analysis
The first three of these symbols are self delimiting.
Atoms are  not; they therefore are delimited by the self delimiting symbols and by linear white space.
For the purposes  of  re  generating sequences of atoms and quoted strings, exactly one SPACE is assumed to exist and should be  used  between  them.
(Also,  in  Section  III.B.3.a,  note  the  rules  concerning treatment of multiple continguous LWSP chars.)
at(the)WBA is analyzed into the following lexical symbols and types:
The cononical representations for the data in these addresses are
the  following  strings  (note that there is exactly one SPACE between words):
:sysmail at Some Host and Muhammed Ali at WBA 2.
The first four rules, below, indicate a meta syntax  for  fields, without  regard to their particular type or internal syntax.
; (141 172, 97. 122.)
;  word must be a ;  quoted string.
"White space" Remember that in field names  and  structured  field  bodies, MULTIPLE  LINEAR  WHITE SPACE TELNET ASCII CHARACTERS (namely HTABs and SPACEs)
ARE TREATED AS SINGLE SPACES AND MAY FREELY SURROUND ANY SYMBOL.
In all header fields, the only place in which at least one space is REQUIRED is at the  beginning  of continuation
lines  in a folded field.
When passing text to processes which do  not  interpret  text  according  to  this standard  (e.g.,  ARPANET FTP mail servers), then exactly one SPACE should be used in place of arbitrary linear white space and comment sequences.
WHEREVER A MEMBER OF THE LIST  OF
S  IS  ALLOWED, LWSP CHARS MAY ALSO OCCUR BEFORE AND/
Writers of mail sending  (i.e.  header  generating)
programs should  realize  that  there is no Network wide definition of the effect of horizontal tab TELNET ASCII characters  on  the appearance  of  text  at another Network host; therefore, the use  of  tabs  in  message
headers,  though  permitted,   is discouraged.
Note that  during  transmissions  across
the  ARPANET  using TELNET  NVT  connections
,  data  must  conform  to TELNET NVT conventions (e.g., CR must be followed by either LF, making a CRLF, or <null>, if the CR is to stand alone).
Comments Comments are detected as such  only  within  field bodies  of structured  fields.
A  comment  is  a  set  of TELNET ASCII characters, which is not within a quoted string and which  is enclosed  in  matching parentheses; parentheses nest, so that if an unquoted left parenthesis occurs in a  comment  string, there  must  also  be  a  matching right parenthesis.
When a comment is used to act as the delimiter between a sequence of two  lexical  symbols,
, it is lexically equivalent with one SPACE, for the purposes  of  regenerating B. Lexical Analysis
In particular comments are NOT passed to the FTP  server,  as part  of  a MAIL or MLFL command, since comments are not part of the "formal" address.
If a comment is to be "folded" onto multiple lines, then  the syntax for folding must be adhered to.
(See items III.B.1.a, above,  and  III.B.3.f,  below.)
Note  that  the   official semantics therefore do not "see" any unquoted CRLFs which are in comments, although particular parsing programs may wish to note  their  presence.
For  these  programs,  it  would  be reasonable to interpret a "CRLF LWSP char" as  being  a  CRLF which  is part of the comment; i.e., the CRLF is kept and the LWSP char is discarded.
(i.e.,  a  backslash followed  by a CR followed by a LF)
still must be followed by at least one LWSP char.
The quote character (backslash) and characters which  delimit syntactic units are not, generally, to be taken as data which are part  of
the  delimited  or  quoted  unit(s).
The  one exception is SPACE.
In particular, the quotation marks which define  a  quoted string,  the  parentheses  which  define  a comment  and the backslash which quotes a following character are  NOT  part  of  the  quoted string,  comment  or   quoted character.
Note  that the  syntax  allows  any  character  to  be  quoted  within a quoted string or comment;  however
only  certain  characters MUST  be quoted to be included as data.
These characters are those which are not part of the alternate text  group  (i.e., ctext or qtext).
A single SPACE is assumed to exist between  contiguous  words in  a  phrase,  and this interpretation is independent of the actual number of LWSP chars which the creator places  between the  words.
To include more than one SPACE, the creator must make the LWSP chars be part of a quoted string.
Quotation marks which delimit a quoted string and backslashes which  quote the following character should NOT accompany the quoted string when the string is used with processes that  do B. Lexical Analysis d.
(i.e.,  in  words  in  structured  fields) quoted strings   are   treated   as  a  single  symbol  (i.e. equivalent to an atom, syntactically).
If a quoted string is to  be
"folded"  onto  multiple  lines,  then the syntax for folding must be adhered to.
(See items III.B.1.a, above, and III.B.3.f,   below.)
that  the  official  semantics therefore do not "see" any bare CRLFs which  are  in  quoted  strings,  although  particular  parsing  programs may wish to note  their  presence.
For  these  programs,  it  would  be reasonable  to  interpret  a "CRLF LWSP char" as being a CRLF which is part of the quoted string; i.e., the  CRLF  is  kept and
(i.e., a backslash followed by a CR followed by a LF) are also subject to  rules  of  folding,  but  the  presence  of  the  quoting character (backslash)
explicitly indicates that the  CRLF  is data to the quoted string.
Stripping off the first following LWSP char is also appropriate when parsing quoted CRLFs.
There are three types of brackets which must be well nested:
Parentheses are used to indicate comments.
indicate  that  the included list of addresses are to be treated as a group.
f.  Case independence of certain specials atoms Certain atoms, which are represented in the syntax as literal alphabetic  strings, can be represented in any combination of upper and lower case.
B. Lexical Analysis "from", and even "FroM" should all  be  treated  identically.
However,  the  case  shown in this specification is suggested for message creating processes.
Note that, at the  level  of this  specification,  case  IS  relevant  to  other words and texts.
Also see Section IV.A.1.f, below.
Each header item (field of the message) may be represented on exactly  one line consisting of the name of the field and its body; this is what the parser sees.
For readability,  it  is recommended  that the field body portion of long header items be "folded" onto multiple lines of the actual header.
greater  than  65  or 72 characters.
The former length is recommended as a limit, but it is not imposed by this standard.
ASCII characters (ASCII BS, decimal 8.)
may be   included   in   texts   and   quoted strings  to  effect overstriking; however, any use of backspaces which effects an overstrike  to
the  beginning  of the text or quoted string is prohibited.
C.  GENERAL SYNTAX OF MESSAGES:
Due to an artifact of the notational conventions, the  syntax indicates that, when present, "Date", "From", "Sender", and "Reply To" fields  must  be in  a  particular order.
These header items must be unique (occur exactly once).
However  header fields, in fact, are NOT required to occur in any particular order, except that  the  message  body must  occur  AFTER  the headers.
For readability and ease of parsing  by  simple  systems,
This   specification   permits   multiple occurrences of  most  optional fields.
However, their  interpretation  is not specified here, and their use is strongly discouraged.
The following syntax for the bodies of various fields  should  be thought  of as describing each field body as a single long string (or line).
The  section  on  Lexical  Analysis  (section  II.B)
<Any field which is defined in a document published as a formal extension to this specification> user defined field   <Any field which has not been defined in this specification or published as an extension to this specification; names for such fields must be unique and may be preempted by published extensions> D.
SUPPORTING CONSTRUCTS host phrase    phrase
Basic address host indicator    1
; Right most node is ;  at top of network ;  hierarchy;
; Local differential ;  hours/min.
SEMANTICS A.  ADDRESS FIELDS 1.
The phrase part of a host phrase in an address  specification (i.e.,  the  host's name for the mailbox) is understood to be whatever the receiving FTP Server allows (for example,  TENEX systems  do  not  now understand addresses of the form "P. D. Q. Bach", but another system might).
Note that a mailbox is a conceptual  entity
which  does  not necessarily pertain to file storage.
For example, some sites may choose to print mail on their line  printer  and  deliver the output to the addressee's desk.
An individual may have  several  mailboxes  and  a  group  of individuals  may wish to receive mail as a single unit (i.e., a distribution list).
The second and third  alternatives  of an  address  list  (#address)  allow  naming  a collection of subordinate  addresses  list(s).
Groups  can be expected to nest (i.e., to  contain  subgroups).
For  both  individuals  and groups,  a  copy  of the transmitted message is to be sent to EACH mailbox  listed.
For  the  case  of  a  special  list, treatment of addresses is defined in the relevant subsections of this section.
The inclusion of bare quoted strings as addresses (i.e.,  the fourth  address form  alternative)  is allowed as a syntactic convenience, but no semantics  are  defined  for  their  use.
However,  it is reasonable, when replicating an address list, to replicate ALL of its members, including quoted strings.
":Include:" specifications are used to refer to one  or  more locations  containing
If more than one location is referenced, the address part of the A. Address Fields phrase; only they have any  meaning  within  this  construct.
The phrase part of indicated host phrases should contain text which the referenced  host  can  resolve  to  a  file.
This standard is not a protocol and so does not prescribe HOW data is to be retrieved from the  file.
However,  the  following requirements are made:  The file must be accessible  through  the  local operating system interface (if it exists), given adequate user access rights; and  If a host has an FTP server and a user  is  able to  retrieve  any files from the host using that server, then the file must be accessible through FTP,  using  DEFAULT  transfer  settings,  given adequate user access rights.
It is intended that this mechanism allow programs to retrieve such lists automatically.
The interpretation of such a file reference follows.
This is not  intended  to imply any particular implementation scheme, but is presented  to  aid  in  understanding  the  notion  of including  file  contents in address lists:
Elements of the address list part are
alternates and  the  contents of ONLY ONE of them are to be included in the resultant address list.
The contents of the file indicated by  a  member host phrase  are  treated as an address list and are inserted as an address
list  (#address)  in the  position  of  the  path item in the syntax.
That is, the TELNET ASCII characters  specifying the  entire
Therefore, the contents of  each  file, indicated   by   an  Include  address,  must  be syntactically self contained and must adhere  to the full syntax prescribed herein for an address list.
":Postal:" specifications are used to indicate (U.S.)  postal addresses,  but
can  be  treated  the  same as quoted string addresses.
The ":Include:" alternative also is valid.
the  publishing  of  specifications  for these extended data  types.
In the absence of defined semantics,  any  occurrence of  an address in this form may be treated as a quoted string address.
A node name must be THE official name of a network or a host, or  else  a decimal number indicating the Network address for that network or host, at the time  the  message  is  created.
The  USE  OF NUMBERS IS STRONGLY DISCOURAGED and is permitted only due to the occasional necessity of bypassing local  name tables.
For  the  ARPANET, official names are maintained by the Network Information Center at  SRI  International,  Menlo Park, California.
Whenever a message might be transmitted or migrate to a  host on  another  network,  full  hierarchical  addresses  must be specified.
These  are  indicated  as  a  series  of  words, separated  by at sign or "at" indications.
The communication environment is assumed to consist of a collection of networks organized  as  independent  "trees"  except  for  connections between the root nodes.
That is, only the roots can  act  as gateways  between  these  independent  networks.
While other actual connections may exist, it is believed  that  presuming this  type of organization will provide a reliable method for describing VALID, if not EFFICIENT, paths between  hosts.
A typical full mailbox specification might therefore look like: Friendly User @ hosta @
local net1 @ major netq
In the simplest case, a mail sending host should transmit the message  to the node which is mentioned last (farthest to the right), strip off that node reference from the specification, and then pass the remaining host phrase to the recipient host (in  the  ARPANET,  its  FTP server) for it to process.
This treats the remaining portion of the host indicator merely  as the terminating part of the phrase.
Using  the above example, the following string would be passed to  the major netq gateway:
When the sending host  has  more  knowledge  of  the  network A. Address Fields To use the above specification as an example:
If  a  sending hostb  also were part of local net1, then it could  send  the message  directly  to  hosta
and  would give only the phrase "Friendly User" to hosta's mail receiving program.
If  hostb were  part  of  local net2, along with hostc, and happened to know that hosta and hostc were  part  of
another  local net, then  hostb  could  send  the message to hostc to the address "Friendly User@hosta".
The phrase in a host phrase is intended to be meaningful only to
To all other hosts, the phrase is to be treated as an uninterpreted string.
No  case transformations  should  be  (automatically) performed on the phrase.
The phrase  is  passed  to  the  local  host's  mail sending  program; it is the responsibility of the destination host's mail receiving (distribution) program to perform  case mapping on this phrase, if required, to deliver the mail.
The standard  allows  only  a  subset  of
possible  with the From, Sender, and  Reply To  fields.
From This field contains the identity of the person(s) who  wished this message to be sent.
The message creation process should default this field to be a single machine address, indicating the AGENT (person or process) entering the message.
NOT  done, the "Sender" field MUST be present; if this IS done, the "Sender" field is optional.
This field contains  the  identity  of  the  AGENT (person or process) who  sends the message.
It is intended for use when the sender is not the author of the message, or  to  indicate who  among  a group of authors actually sent the message.
If the contents  of  the  "Sender"  field  would  be  completely redundant with the "From" field, then the "Sender" field need not be present and  its  use  is  discouraged  (though  still legal);  in  particular,  the  "Sender" field MUST be present if it is NOT the same as the "From" Field.
The  Sender  host phrase  includes  a   phrase   which   must correspond  to  a  specific  agent  (i.e.,  a human user or a A. Address Fields mail  and not simply include the name of a mailbox from which the mail was sent.
For example in the case of a shared login name, the name, by itself, would not be adequate.
The phrase part of the host phrase,  which  refers  to  this  agent,  is expected  to be a computer system term, and not (for example) a generalized person reference which can be used outside  the network text message context.
Since the critical function served by the "Sender"  field  is the  identification of the agent responsible for sending mail and since computer programs cannot be  held  accountable  for their  behavior, is strongly recommended that when a computer program generates a message, the HUMAN who is responsible for that  program  be  referenced  as  part of the "Sender" field host phrase.
To This field provides a general mechanism  for  indicating  any mailbox(es) to which responses are to be sent.
Three typical uses for this feature can be  distinguished.
In  the  first case,  the  author(s)
may  not  have  regular  machine based mailboxes and therefore wish(es)
indicate  an  alternate machine  address.
In  the  second  case, an author may wish additional persons to be made aware of, or  responsible  for, responses;  responders
should  send  their  replies  to  the "Reply To" mailbox(es) listed in  the  original  message.
A somewhat  different  use may be of some help to "text message teleconferencing" groups equipped with automatic distribution services:   include  the  address  of  that  service  in  the "Reply To"  field  of
all   messages   submitted   to   the teleconference;  then  participants can "reply" to conference submissions to guarantee  the  correct  distribution  of  any submission of their own.
Reply To fields are  NOT
any  machine addresses  (i.e., host phrases).
Note,  however,  that  the absence  of even one  valid  network  address
will  tend  to prevent  software  systems from automatically assisting users in conveniently responding to mail.
For systems which automatically generate address lists for replies to messages, the following recommendations are made:
The receiver, when replying  to  a  message,  should NEVER automatically include the "Sender" host phrase in the reply's address list;  If the  "Reply To"  field  exists,  then  the  reply A. Address Fields (Extensive    examples  are  provided  in   Section   V.)
This recommendation  is intended only for originator fields and is not intended to suggest that replies should not also be sent  to  the other  recipients  of  this  message.
It is up to the respective mail handling programs to decide what additional facilities  will be provided.
To This field contains the identity of the primary recipients of the message.
This field contains the identity of the secondary  recipients of the message.
This field contains the identity of additional recipients  of the  message.
The contents of this field are not included in copies of the message  sent  to
the  primary  and  secondary recipients.
Some  systems may choose to include the text of the "Bcc" field only in the author(s)
's  copy,  while  others may  also  include it in the text sent to all those indicated in the "Bcc" list.
B.  REFERENCE SPECIFICATION FIELDS 1.
This field contains a unique identifier (the phrase) which refers to  THIS  version of THIS message.
The uniqueness of the message identifier is guaranteed by the host which  generates  it.
This identifier is intended to be machine readable and not necessarily meaningful to humans.
A message identifier pertains  to
exactly one  instantiation  of a particular message
; subsequent revisions to the message should each receive a new message identifier.
To The contents of this field identify previous correspondence which B. Reference Specification Fields 3.
The contents of this field identify  other  correspondence
if  message  identifiers are used, they  must  use  the  mach
Keywords This field contains keywords or phrases, separated by commas.
C.  OTHER FIELDS AND SYNTACTIC ITEMS 1.
The "Subject" field is intended to provide as much information as necessary  to  adequately summarize or indicate the nature of the message.
Comments Permits adding text comments onto the message without  disturbing the contents of the message's body.
A relatively limited number of common fields have been defined in this  document.
As network mail requirements dictate, additional fields may be standardized.
The authors of  this  document  will regulate  the publishing of such definitions as extensions to the basic specification.
User defined field Individual users of network mail  are  free  to  define  and  use additional  header fields.
Such fields must have names which are not  already  used  in  the  current  specification  or  in   any definitions  of extension fields, and the overall syntax of these user defined fields must conform to  this  specification's  rules for  delimiting and  folding  fields.
Due to the extension field publishing process, the name of a user defined field may be  pre  empted.
D. Dates D.  DATES AND TIMES
If included, day of week must be the  day  implied  by  the  date specification.
may  be  indicated  in  several  ways.
The  military standard   uses  a  single  character  for  each  zone.
"Z"  is Greenwhich Mean Time; "A" indicates one  hour  earlier,  and  "M" indicates  12 hours earlier; "N" is one hour later, and "Y" is 12 hours later.
The letter "J" is not used.
The  other  remaining two  forms  are  taken from ANSI standard X3.51 1975.
One allows explicit indication of the amount of offset from GMT;  the  other A. Addresses
V.  EXAMPLES A.  ADDRESSES 1.
Alfred E. Neuman <Neuman at BBN TENEXA> 2.
These two "Alfred E. Neuman" examples have  identical  semantics, as  far  as  the  operation  of  the  local  host's  mail sending (distribution) program (also sometimes called its  "mailer")  and the  remote  host's  FTP  server  are  concerned.
In  the first example, the "Alfred E. Neuman" is  ignored  by  the  mailer,  as "Neuman  at  BBN TENEXA" completely specifies the recipient.
The second example contains no superfluous information,  and,  again, "Neuman@BBN TENEXA" is the intended recipient.
Al Neuman at BBN TENEXA
This is identical to "Al Neuman <Al Neuman at BBN TENEXA>".
That is,  the  full  phrase, "Al Neuman", is passed to the FTP server.
Note that not all FTP servers accept multi word identifiers;  and some  that  do  accept  them
will treat each word as a different addressee (in this case, attempting to send a copy of the message to "Al" and a copy to "Neuman").
"George Lovell, Ted Hackle" <Shared Mailbox at Office 1
This form might be used to indicate  that  a  single  mailbox  is shared  by  several  users.
The quoted string is ignored by the originating  host's  mailer,  as  "Shared Mailbox  at   Office 1" completely specifies the destination mailbox.
Wilt (the Stilt) Chamberlain at NBA
The "(the Stilt)" is a comment, which  is  NOT  included  in  the destination  mailbox  address  handed to the originating system's mailer.
the  string  "Wilt Chamberlain",  with exactly  one  space  between
the  first  and second words.
(The quotation marks are not included.)
B. Address Lists B.  ADDRESS
Pompous Person <WhoZiWhatZit at Cordon Bleu
, Cooks:  Childs at WGBH, Galloping Gourmet at ANT (Australian National Television);, Wine Lovers:  Cheapie at Discount Liquors,
Port at Portugal;;, Jones at SEA
This group list example points  out  the  use  of  comments,  the nesting  of groups, and the mixing of addresses and groups.
Note that the two consecutive semi colons  preceding  "Jones  at  SEA" mean that Jones is NOT a member of the Gourmets group.
Author sent George Jones logs into  his  Host  as  "Jones".
From:  Jones at Host or From:  George Jones <Jones at Host> 2.
Secretary sent George Jones logs in as Jones on his Host.
His  secretary,  who logs in as Secy on Shost sends mail for him.
Replies to the mail should go to George, of course.
Shared directory or unrepresentative directory name
George Jones logs in as Group at Host.
He  sends  mail  himself; replies should go to the Group mailbox.
Secretary sent, for user of shared directory George Jones' secretary sends mail for George in his capacity  as a  member  of  Group  while  logged  in as Secy at Host.
Replies should go to Group.
Secretary acting as full agent of author George Jones asks his secretary (Secy at Host) to send a  message for  him  in  his  capacity  as Group.
He wants his secretary to handle all replies.
Agent for user without online mailbox
non ARPANET  user  friend  of  George's,  Sarah,  is  visting.
George's  secretary  sends  some  mail  to  a  friend of Sarah in computer land.
Replies should go to  George,  whose  mailbox  is Jones at Host.
To: Jones at Host 7.
Sent by member of a committee
George is a member of a committee.
He wishes to have any replies to his message go to all committee members.
Big committee: Jones at Host, Smith at Other Host, Doe at Somewhere Else
; Note that if George had not included himself in  the  enumeration C. Originator Items 8.
Example of INCORRECT use George desires a reply to go  to  his  secretary;
therefore  his secretary  leaves  his  mailbox  address  off
"From" field, leaving only his name, which is not, itself, a mailbox address.
From:   George Jones Sender: Secy at SHost THIS IS NOT PERMITTED.
Replies are NEVER implicitly sent to  the "Sender";  George's  secretary  should  have  used the "Reply To" field, or the  mail  creating  program
should  have  forced  the secretary to.
Agent for member of a committee George's secretary sends out a message which was authored jointly by all the members of the "Big committee".
From:   Big committee: Jones at Host, Smith at Other Host, Doe at Somewhere Else; Sender: Secy at SHost D.
Minimum required: Date:  26 August 1976 1429 EDT From:  Jones at Host 2.
Using some of the additional fields
: Date: 26 August 1976 1430 EDT From:George Jones<Group at Host> Sender:Secy at SHOST
Al Neuman at Mad Host, Sam Irving at Other Host D.  Complete Headers 3.
About as complex as you're going to get
The Syntax in the RFC Sender   :
KSecy at Other Host Reply
Tom Softwood <Balsa at Another Host>, Sam Irving at Other Host;, Standard Distribution::Include:
</main/davis/people/standard at Other Host, "
<Jones>standard.dist.3" at Tops 20 Host>, (The following Included Postal list is part of Standard Distribution.)
Non net addrs@Other host;, :Postal: "Sam Irving, P.O. Box 001, Las Vegas, Nevada"  (
So that he can stay apprised of the situation)
Sam is away on business.
He asked me to handle his mail for him.
He'll be able to provide  a more  accurate  explanation
when  he  returns next week.
In Reply To: <some string at SHOST> Special (action):
This is a sample of multi word field  names, using a range of characters.
A. Alphabetical Listing of Syntax Rules
any TELNET ASCII alphabetic character
1 <any CHAR except specials and CTLs>
<any TELNET ASCII control character and DEL> date
<any TELNET ASCII digit> extension field
the TELNET ASCII characters making up the field body, as defined in the following sections, and consisting of combinations of atom, quoted  string, and specials tokens, or else consisting of texts> A. Alphabetical Listing of Syntax Rules host indicator    1
Some mail reading software systems may wish to perform  only minimal  processing,  ignoring  the internal syntax of structured field bodies and treating them the  same  as  unstructured field  bodies.
Such software will need only to distinguish:  Header fields from the message body,  Beginnings of fields from lines which continue fields,  Field names from field contents.
The abbreviated set of syntactic rules  which  follows  will suffice  for  this  purpose.
They  describe  a  limited view of messages and are a subset of the syntactic rules provided in  the main part of this specification.
One small exception is that the contents of field bodies consist only of text:
Headers occur before the message body and are terminated  by a null line (i.e., two contiguous CRLFs).
A line which continues a header field begins with a SPACE or HTAB  character,  while  a  line  beginning a field starts with a printable character which is not a colon.
A field name consists of one or  more  printable  characters (excluding colon), each separated by one or more SPACES or HTABS.
American  National Standards Institute:  New York, 1975.
No.  10596; Augmentation Research  Center,  Stanford  Research  Institute: Menlo Park, July 1972.
A.K.  Comments on the File Transfer  Protocol.
ARPANET Request for Comments, No.
Stanford   Research Institute:  Menlo Park, August 1972.
Bhushan, A.K., Pogran, K.T., Tomlinson,  R.S.,  and  White,  J.E. Standardizing  Network
18516; Augmentation  Research  Center,  Stanford  Research Institute: Menlo Park, September 1973.
Feinler,  E.J.  and  Postel,  J.B.
7104; Augmentation Research Center, Stanford Research Institute:  Menlo Park,  April  1976.
McKenzie,  A.   File  Transfer  Protocol.
14333; Augmentation Research  Center,  Stanford  Research  Institute: Menlo Park, February 1973.
McKenzie,  A. TELNET Protocol Specification.
, Stanford Research Institute:  Menlo Park, August 1973.
Myer, T.H. and Henderson, D.A.   Message
No. 680, Network Information Center
32116;  Augmentation  Research  Center,  Stanford Research Institute:  Menlo Park, 1975.
Neigus,  N.   File  Transfer  Protocol.
17759; Augmentation Research  Center,  Stanford  Research  Institute: Menlo Park, July 1973.
37435;  Augmentation  Research  Center,  Stanford Research Institute:  Menlo Park, May 1977.
Postel, J.B.  Revised  FTP  Reply  Codes.
