Abstract This memo reiterates the assignment of an IPv4 address block (192.0.0.0/24) to IANA.
It also instructs IANA to restructure its IPv4 and IPv6 Special Purpose Address Registries.
Upon restructuring, the aforementioned registries will record all special  purpose address blocks, maintaining a common set of information regarding each address block.
This memo obsoletes RFCs 4773, 5156, 5735, and 5736.
In order to support new protocols and practices, the IETF occasionally reserves an address block for a special purpose.
For example, [RFC1122] reserves an IPv4 address block (0.0.0.0/8) to represent the local (i.e., "this") network.
Likewise, [RFC4291] reserves an IPv6 address block (fe80::/10) to represent link scoped unicast addresses.
Periodically, the IETF publishes an RFC that catalogs special purpose address blocks.
Currently, [RFC5735] catalogs all IPv4 special  purpose address blocks and [RFC5156]
catalogs all IPv6 special  purpose address blocks.
[RFC5736] assigns an IPv4 address block (192.0.0.0/24) to IANA and instructs IANA to allocate special purpose address blocks from this space.
[RFC5736] also instructs IANA to create an IPv4 Special  Purpose Address Registry that records allocations from this address space.
However, [RFC5736] does not instruct IANA to record special  purpose address block reservations from outside of the aforementioned space in the IPv4 Special Purpose Address Registry.
Likewise, [RFC2928] assigns an IPv6 address block (2001:0000::/23) to IANA and instructs IANA to allocate special purpose address blocks from this space.
[RFC4773] instructs IANA to create an IPv6 Special  Purpose Address Registry that records allocations from this address space.
However, [RFC4773] does not instruct IANA to record special  purpose address block reservations from outside of the aforementioned space in the IPv6 Special Purpose Address Registry.
This memo reiterates the assignment of an IPv4 address block (192.0.0.0/24) to IANA.
It also instructs IANA to restructure its IPv4 and IPv6 Special Purpose Address Registries.
Specifically, this memo instructs IANA to record all special purpose address blocks in the aforementioned registries.
These include, but are not limited to, IPv4 allocations from 192.0.0.0/24 and IPv6 allocations from 2001:0000::/23.
Furthermore, this memo defines:  a common set of information that the registries will maintain regarding each special purpose address block  a common set of requirements for future entries
When the aforementioned registries include all special purpose address blocks, [RFC5735] and [RFC5156] will become redundant with the registries.
Therefore, this memo obsoletes [RFC5735] and [RFC5156].
Because this memo reiterates the assignment of 192.0.0.0/24 to IANA, and because it restructures the IPv4 Special  Purpose Address Registry, it obsoletes [RFC5736].
Finally, because this memo restructures the IPv6 Special Purpose Address Registry, it obsoletes [RFC4773].
Assignment of an IPv4 Address Block to IANA Table 7 of this document records the assignment of an IPv4 address block (192.0.0.0/24) to IANA for IETF protocol assignments.
This address allocation to IANA is intended to support IETF protocol assignments.
A more general view of the roles of IANA with respect to address allocation functions is documented in Sections 4.1 and 4.3
IANA has designated special purpose address blocks in compliance with [RFC2860].
Restructuring of the IPv4 and IPv6
Special Purpose Address Registries IANA has restructured the following registries:  IPv4 Special Purpose Address Registry  IPv6 Special Purpose Address Registry
The IPv4 Special Purpose Address Registry records all IPv4 special  purpose address blocks.
These reservations include, but are not limited to, allocations from the 192.0.0.0/24 address block.
Likewise, the IPv6 Special Purpose Address Registry records all IPv6 special purpose address blocks.
These reservations include, but are not limited to, allocations from the 2001:0000::/23 address block.
Section 2.2.1 of this document describes information that both registries will maintain for each entry.
Initially, IANA has populated the IPv4 Special Purpose Address Registry with information taken from Section 2.2.2 of this document.
Likewise, IANA has populated the IPv6 Special Purpose Address Registry with information taken from Section 2.2.3 of this document.
IANA will update the aforementioned registries as requested in the "IANA Considerations" section of a document that has passed IETF Review [RFC5226].
The "IANA Considerations" section must include all of the information specified in Section 2.2.1 of this document.
Special Purpose Address Registries maintain the following information regarding each entry:  Address Block A block of IPv4 or IPv6 addresses that has been registered for a special purpose.
A descriptive name for the special purpose address block.
RFC The RFC through which the special purpose address block was requested.
The date upon which the special purpose address block was allocated.
The date upon which the allocation is to be terminated.
This field is applicable for limited use allocations only.
A boolean value indicating whether an address from the allocated special purpose address block is valid when used as the source address of an IP datagram that transits two devices.
A boolean value indicating whether an address from the allocated special purpose address block is valid when used as the destination address of an IP datagram that transits two devices.
Forwardable A boolean value indicating whether a router may forward an IP datagram whose destination address is drawn from the allocated special purpose address block between external interfaces.
Global A boolean value indicating whether an IP datagram whose destination address is drawn from the allocated special purpose address block is forwardable beyond a specified administrative domain.
Reserved by Protocol A boolean value indicating whether the special purpose address block is reserved by IP, itself.
This value is "TRUE" if the RFC that created the special purpose address block requires all compliant IP implementations to behave in a special way when processing packets either to or from addresses contained by the address block.
If the value of "Destination" is FALSE, the values of "Forwardable" and "Global" must also be false.
IPv4 Special Purpose Address Registry Entries Tables 1 though 16, below, represent entries with which IANA has initially populated the IPv4 Special Purpose Address Registry.
[1] Several protocols have been granted exceptions to this rule.
For examples, see [RFC4379] and [RFC5884].
[2] Not usable unless by virtue of a more specific reservation.
Special Purpose Address Registry Entries Tables 17 through 28, below, represent entries with which the IANA has initially populated the IPv6 Special Purpose Address Registry.
[1] Unless allowed by a more specific allocation.
Security Considerations Security of the Internet's routing system relies on the ability to authenticate an assertion of unique control of an address block.
Measures to authenticate such assertions rely on validation that the address block forms part of an existing allocated address block and that there is a trustable and unique reference in the IANA address registries.
The proposed registry is intended to provide an authoritative source of information regarding the currency and intended purpose of special purpose address blocks that are designated from the IANA administered Special Purpose registry.
This is a small step towards the creation of a comprehensive registry framework that can be used as a trust point for commencing a chain of address validation.
Consideration should be given to IANA registry publication formats that are machine parsable.
Additionally, consideration should be given to the use of file signatures and associated certificate mechanisms to allow applications to confirm that the registry contents are current and that they have been published by the IANA.
