Abstract The MIDI Manufacturers Association (MMA) and the Association of Musical Electronics Industry (AMEI) have produced the Mobile XMF standard, which was developed particularly for mobile MIDI applications.
Mobile XMF is a very compact media type providing high quality synthetic audio content for music downloading and messaging applications that require MIME registration.
This document registers the media type audio/mobile xmf.
Introduction MIDI content is used commonly in the Internet.
Typically, MIDI data is stored in the Standard MIDI File (SMF) format [8].
This MIME type registration uses the Mobile XMF file format for the encapsulation of SP MIDI [3,4] and Mobile DLS (Downloadable Sounds)
The MIDI Manufacturers Association (MMA) and the Association of Musical Electronics Industry (AMEI) have produced the Mobile XMF standard [1], which was developed particularly for mobile MIDI [7] applications.
Registration of audio/mobile xmf Type name:
audio Subtype name: mobile xmf Required parameters: none Optional parameters: revision:
Mobile XMF file type revision ID revision is the Mobile XMF file type revision ID number from the XmfFileTypeRevisionID field of the XMF Meta File format 2.00.
revision is encoded in hex in US ASCII.
Playback resource list prl contains the playback resources included in all Content Description MetaDataItems of the Mobile XMF file.
prl contains two digit hexadecimal numbers representing data bytes from the Content Description Meta Data.
Each resource is listed exactly once.
A playback resource contains two parts: a prefix and data.
prl is a sequence of two digit hexadecimal numbers encoded in US ASCII.
Thus, prl has an even number of hexadecimal digits.
Example: If the file includes Playback Resource Lists such as [00h 01h 00h 02h] and [00h 01h 00h 03h], the corresponding prl is 000100020003 containing playback resources 01, 02, and 03 each with the prefix 00.
Minimum playback requirements minimum pr contains the Maximum Instantaneous Resource (MIR) values from the first row of all MIR Count Tables corresponding to the playback resources listed in prl.
Only the largest value from the values of the same resource is chosen.
minimum prl is a sequence of two digit hexadecimal numbers encoded in US ASCII.
Thus, minimum prl has an even number of hexadecimal digits.
minimum pr requires the use of prl, and the values in minimum pr must be in the same order as the resources in prl.
minimum pr is the more important of minimum pr and total pr, because it defines the minimum playback requirements.
Example: If the file includes the first rows of MIR Count Tables such as [02h 00h] and [01h 01h] corresponding to the above Playback Resource Lists, the corresponding minimum pr is 020001.
(02 is the largest of 2 and 1, 00
is the largest of 0, and 01 is the largest of 1.)
Total playback requirements total pr contains the MIR values from the last row of all MIR Count Tables corresponding to the playback resources listed in prl.
Only the largest value from the values of the same resource is chosen.
total pr is a sequence of two digit hexadecimal numbers encoded in US ASCII.
Thus, total pr has an even number of hexadecimal digits.
total pr requires the use of prl, and the values in total pr must be in the same order as the resources in prl.
Example: If the file includes the last rows of MIR Count Tables such as [05h 02h] and [06h 01h] corresponding to the above Playback Resource Lists, the corresponding total pr is 060201.
(06 is the largest of 5 and 6, 02 is the largest of 2, and 01 is the largest of 1.)
Encoding considerations: mobile xmf data is binary data and must be encoded for non binary transport; Base64 [9] is suitable for Email.
Security considerations: Many synthetic audio compositions have associated intellectual property rights.
It is conceivable that the rights owners of mobile xmf content will want to protect their rights by applying security mechanisms that prohibit the rendering of the content without a legally acquired license to do so.
These mechanisms would be applied externally to the Content Type defined here; mobile xmf content itself is not encrypted internally.
mobile xmf streams do not contain executable content.
Mobile XMF players are robust against corrupted mobile xmf content, because Mobile XMF players ignore unidentified content.
prl, minimum pr, and total pr parameters can be used to represent Mobile DLS playback memory requirements for protecting against the excessive usage of playback memory.
Interoperability considerations: Mobile XMF is a Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) specification developed by MMA and AMEI.
Mobile XMF is based on the XMF Meta File Format Specification v2.00 [5,6], which standardizes a meta file format for the electronic distribution of music.
mobile xmf data is stored in XMF file format [5,6].
Mobile XMF Content Format Specification, MMA specification v1.0., RP 42, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Specification is available from: http://www.midi.org/about midi/specshome.shtml Applications which use this media type: mobile xmf is a synthetic audio format for the flexible presentation of SP MIDI and Mobile DLS instrument data on a wide range of playback devices, particularly portable appliances such as mobile phones, PDAs, and palmtop computers.
\130\115\106\137\062\056\060\060\000\000\000\002 File extension(s): mxmf Macintosh File Type Code(s
): mxmf Person & email address to contact for further information:
Timo Kosonen Email: timo.kosonen@nokia.com Intended usage:
La Habra, CA  90632 3173
736 9775 Point of contact: Tom White Email:
Security Considerations Security considerations are specified in the MIME subtype registration contained in Section 2.
IANA Considerations Section 2 of this document registers one MIME subtype.
