Abstract This document describes how to adapt the Session Description Protocol (SDP) to express one or more source addresses as a source filter for one or more destination "connection" addresses.
It defines the syntax and semantics for an SDP "source filter" attribute that may reference either IPv4 or IPv6 address(es) as either an inclusive or exclusive source list for either multicast or unicast destinations.
In particular, an inclusive source filter can be used to specify a Source Specific Multicast (SSM) session.
The Session Description Protocol [SDP] provides a general purpose format for describing multimedia sessions in announcements or invitations.
SDP uses an entirely textual data format (the US ASCII subset of [UTF 8]) to maximize portability among transports.
SDP does not define a protocol, but only the syntax to describe a multimedia session with sufficient information to discover and participate in that session.
Session descriptions may be sent using any number of existing application protocols for transport (e.g., Session Announcement Protocol (SAP), SIP, Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP), email, and HTTP).
Typically, session descriptions reference an IP multicast address for the "connection address" (destination), though unicast addresses or fully qualified domain names (FQDNs)
The "source  filter" attribute defined in this document qualifies the session traffic by identifying the address (or FQDN) of legitimate sources (senders).
The intent is for receivers to use the source and destination address pair(s) to filter traffic, so that applications receive only legitimate session traffic.
Receiver applications are expected to use the SDP source filter information to identify traffic from legitimate senders, and discard traffic from illegitimate senders.
Applications and hosts may also share the source filter information with network elements (e.g., with routers using [IGMPv3]) so they can potentially perform the traffic filtering operation further "upstream," closer to the source(s).
The "source filter" attribute can appear at the session level and/or the media level.
The purpose of a source filter is to help protect receivers from traffic sent from illegitimate source addresses.
Filtering traffic can help to preserve content integrity and protect against Denial of Service (DoS) attacks.
For multicast destination addresses, receiver applications MAY apply source filters using the Multicast Source Filter APIs [MSF API].
Hosts are likely to implement these APIs using protocol mechanisms to convey the source filters to local multicast routers.
Other "upstream" multicast routers MAY apply the filters and thereby provide more explicit multicast group management and efficient utilization of network resources.
The protocol mechanisms to enable these operations are beyond the scope of this document, but their potential provided motivation for SDP source filters.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [REQMNT].
The SDP source filter attribute does not change any existing SDP syntax or semantics, but defines a format for additional session description information.
Specifically, source filter syntax can prescribe one or more unicast addresses as either legitimate or illegitimate sources for any (or all) SDP session description "connection address" field values.
Note that the unicast source addresses specified by this attribute are those that are seen by a receiver.
Therefore, if source addresses undergo translation en route from the original sender to the receiver
e.g., due to Network Address Translation (NAT) or some tunneling mechanism
then the SDP "source filter" attribute, as presented to the receiver, will not be accurate unless the source addresses therein are also translated accordingly.
The source filter attribute has the following syntax: a source filter: <filter mode> <filter spec>
> is either "incl" or "excl" (for inclusion or exclusion, respectively).
The <filter spec> has four sub components:
> A <filter mode> of "incl" means that an incoming packet is accepted only if its source address is in the set specified by <src list
A <filter mode> of "excl" means that an incoming packet is rejected if its source address is in the set specified by <src list
The first sub field, <nettype>, indicates the network type, since SDP is protocol independent.
This document is most relevant to the value "IN", which designates the Internet Protocol.
The second sub field, <address types>, identifies the address family, and for the purpose of this document may be either <addrtype> value "IP4" or "IP6".
The third sub field, <dest address>, is the destination address, which MUST correspond to one or more of the session's "connection  address" field values.
The fourth sub field, <src list>, is the list of source hosts
/interfaces in the source filter, and consists of one or more unicast addresses or FQDNs, separated by space characters.
The format and content of these semantic elements are derived from and compatible with those defined in [SDP].
For more detail, see Appendix A of this document.
There are a number of details to consider when parsing the SDP source filter syntax.
The <dest address> value in a "source filter" attribute MUST correspond to an existing <connection field
> value in the session description.
When the <dest address> value is a multicast address, the field value MUST NOT include the sub fields <ttl> and <number of addresses> from the <connection address> value.
See section 3.2.4 for an example.
See section 3.2.6 for an example.
As has always been the case, the default behavior when a source  filter attribute is not provided in a session description is that all traffic sent to the specified <connection address> value should be accepted (i.e., from any source address).
The source filter grammar does not include syntax to express either "exclude none" or "include all.
" Like the standard <connection field> described in [SDP], the location of the "source filter" attribute determines whether it applies to the entire session or only to a specific medium (i.e., "session level" or "media level").
A media level source filter will always completely override a session level source filter.
A "source filter" need not be located at the same hierarchy level as its corresponding <connection field
So, a media level <source filter> can reference a session level <connection field> value, and a session level "source filter" can be applied to all matching media level <connection field> values.
See section 3.2.3 for an example.
An SDP description MUST NOT contain more than one session level "source filter" attribute that covers the same destination address, or more than one media level "source filter" attribute that covers the same destination address.
There is no specified limit to the number of entries allowed in the <src list>; however, there are practical limits that should be considered.
For example, depending on the transport to be used for the session description, there may be a limit to the total size of the session description (e.g., as determined by the maximum payload in a single datagram).
Also, when the source filter is applied to control protocols, there may be a limit to the number of source addresses that can be sent.
These limits are outside the scope of this document, but should be considered when defining source filter values for SDP.
Examples Here are a number of examples that illustrate how to use the source  filter attribute in some common scenarios.
We use the following session description components as the starting point for the examples to follow.
For each example, we show the source filter with additional relevant information and provide a brief explanation.
All Elvis, all the time u http://www.example.com/ElvisLive/ t 0 0 a recvonly <media description 1
m audio 54320 RTP/AVP 0 <media description 2
m video 54322 RTP/AVP 34 3.2.1.
Source Specific Multicast Example Multicast addresses in the Source Specific Multicast [SSM] range require a single unicast sender address for each multicast destination, so the source filter specification provides a natural fit.
In this example, a session member should receive only traffic sent from 192.0.2.10 to the multicast session address 232.3.4.5.
> c IN IP4 232.3.4.5/127
a source filter: incl IN
IP4 232.3.4.5 192.0.2.10 <media description 1>
This source filter example uses an inclusion list with a single multicast "connection address" as the destination and single unicast address as the source.
Note that the value of the connection address matches the value specified in the connection field.
Also note that since the connection field is located in the session  description section, the source filter applies to all media.
Furthermore, if the SDP description specifies an RTP session (e.g., its "m " line(s) specify "RTP/AVP" as the transport protocol), then the "incl" specification will apply not only to RTP packets, but also to any RTCP packets that are sent to the specified multicast address.
This means that, as a side effect of the "incl" specification, the only possible multicast RTCP packets will be "Sender Report" (SR) packets sent from the specified source address.
Because of this, an SDP description for a Source Specific Multicast (SSM)
This specifies that RTCP "Reception Report" (RR) packets are to be sent back via unicast.
Typically, an SDP session <connection address> value is a multicast address, although it is also possible to use either a unicast address or FQDN.
This example illustrates a scenario whereby a session description indicates the unicast source address 192.0.2.10 in an exclusion filter.
In effect, this sample source filter says, "destination 192.0.2.11 should accept traffic from any sender  except  192.0.2.10."
<session description> c IN IP4 192.0.2.11
excl IN IP4 192.0.2.11 192.0.2.10 <media description 1> 3.2.3.
Hence, the only legitimate source for traffic sent to either 232.2.2.2 or 232.4.4.4 multicast addresses is 192.0.2.10.
Traffic sent from any other unicast source address should be discarded by the receiver.
<session description> a source filter: incl IN IP4
<media description 1> c IN IP4
232.2.2.2/127 <media description 2> c IN IP4 232.4.4.4/63 3.2.4.
In this example, the <connection address
> specifies three multicast addresses:
The first and third of these addresses are given source filters.
However, in this example the second address 224.2.1.2 is  not  given a source filter.
<session description> c IN IP4 224.2.1.1/127/3 a source filter: incl IN IP4
224.2.1.1 192.0.2.10 a source filter
IPv6 Multicast Source Filter Example
This simple example defines a single session level source filter that references a single IPv6 multicast destination and source pair.
The IP multicast traffic sent to FFOE::11A is valid only from the unicast source address 2001:
<session description> c IN IP6
FF0E::11A/127 a source filter incl IN IP6 FF0E::11A 2001:
IPv4 and IPv6 FQDN Example
Although typically both the multicast and source addresses will be the same (either both IPv4 or both IPv6), using the wildcard for addrtype in the source filter
allows asymmetry between the two addresses (so an IPv4 source address may be used with an IPv6 multicast address).
<session description> c IN IP4 channel 1.example.com/127 c IN IP6 channel
IN   channel 1.example.com src 1.example.com
The "source filter" attribute is not intended to be used as an 'offer' in an SDP offer answer exchange [OFFER], because sets of source addresses do not represent 'capabilities' or 'limitations' of the offerer, and because the offerer does not, in general, have a priori knowledge of which IP source address(es) will be included in an answer.
While an answerer may include the "source filter" attribute in his/her answer (e.g., to designate a SSM session), the answerer SHOULD ignore any "source filter" attribute that was present in the original offer.
Interoperability Issues Defining a list of legitimate sources for a multicast destination address represents a departure from the Any Source Multicast (ASM) model, as originally described in [IGMPv1].
The ASM model supports anonymous senders and all types of multicast applications (e.g., many to many).
Use of a source filter excludes some (unknown or undesirable) senders, which lends itself more to one to many or few  to few type multicast applications.
Although these two models have contrasting operational characteristics and requirements, they can coexist on the same network using the same protocols.
Use of source filters do not corrupt the ASM semantics but provide more control for receivers, at their discretion.
Security Considerations See [SDP] for security considerations specific to the Session Description Protocol in general.
The central issue relevant to using source address filters is the question of address authenticity.
Using the source IP address for authentication is weak, since addresses are often dynamically assigned and it is possible for a sender to "spoof" its source address (i.e., use one other than its own) in datagrams that it sends.
Proper router configuration, however, can reduce the likelihood of "spoofed" source addresses being sent to or from a network.
Specifically, border routers are encouraged to filter traffic so that datagrams with invalid source addresses are not forwarded (e.g., routers drop datagrams if the source address is non local)
This, however, does not prevent IP source addresses from being spoofed on a Local Area Network (LAN).
Also, as noted in section 3 above, tunneling or NAT mechanisms may require corresponding translation of the addresses specified in the SDP "source filter" attribute, and furthermore, may cause a set of original source addresses to be translated to a smaller set of source addresses as seen by the receiver.
Use of FQDNs for either <dest address> or <src list
> values provides a layer of indirection that provides great flexibility.
However, it also exposes the source filter to any security inadequacies that the DNS system may have.
If unsecured, it is conceivable that the DNS server could return illegitimate addresses.
In addition, if source filtering is implemented by sharing the source filter information with network elements, then the security of the protocol(s) that are used for this (e.g., [IGMPv3]) becomes important, to ensure that legitimate traffic (and only legitimate traffic) is received.
For these reasons, receivers SHOULD NOT treat the SDP "source filter" attribute as being its sole mechanism for protecting the integrity of received content.
the new attribute name "source filter" has been registered with IANA, as follows:
live555.com phone:  1 650 254 1184 SDP Attribute ("att field")
See this document, and registrations below Appendix A.  Source Filter Attribute Syntax
This appendix provides an Augmented BNF [ABNF] grammar for expressing an exclusion or inclusion list of one or more (IPv4 or IPv6)
It is intended as an extension to the grammar for the Session Description Protocol, as defined in [SDP].
Specifically, it describes the syntax for the new "source filter" attribute field, which MAY be either a session level or media level attribute.
; unicast address is as defined in [SDP].
; unicast address is as defined in [SDP].
> and /<number of addresses
; FQDN and extn addr are as defined ;  in [SDP].
