Abstract This document updates RFC 2026 to no longer use STD 1 as a summary of "Internet Official Protocol Standards".
It obsoletes RFC 5000 and requests the IESG to move RFC 5000 (and
therefore STD 1) to Historic status.
Retiring STD 1 RFC 2026
[RFC2026] and its predecessors call for the publication of an RFC describing the status of IETF protocols: The RFC Editor shall publish periodically an "Internet Official Protocol Standards" RFC [1], summarizing the status of all Internet protocol and service specifications.
The "Internet Official Protocol Standards" document, now as RFC 5000 [RFC5000], has always been listed in the Internet Standard series as STD 1.
However, the document has not been kept up to date in recent years, and it has fallen out of use in favor of the online list produced by the RFC Editor [STDS TRK].
The IETF no longer sees the need for the document to be maintained.
Therefore, this document updates RFC 2026
[RFC2026], effectively removing the above mentioned paragraph from Section 6.1.3, along with the paragraph from Section 2.1
The status of Internet protocol and service specifications is summarized periodically in an RFC entitled "Internet Official Protocol Standards" [1].
This RFC shows the level of maturity and other helpful information for each Internet protocol or service specification (see section 3).
and the paragraph from Section 3.3 that states:
The "Official Protocol Standards" RFC (STD1) lists a general requirement level for each TS, using the nomenclature defined in this section.
This RFC is updated periodically.
In many cases, more detailed descriptions of the requirement levels of particular protocols and of individual features of the protocols will be found in appropriate ASs.
Additionally, this document obsoletes RFC 5000
[RFC5000], the current incarnation of that document, and requests that the IESG move that document (and therefore STD 1) to Historic status.
Finally, RFC 2026 [RFC2026] Section 6.1.3 also calls for the publication of an "official summary of standards actions completed and pending" in the Internet Society's newsletter.
This has also not been done in recent years, and the "publication of record" for standards actions has for some time been the minutes of the IESG [IESG MINUTES].
Therefore, that paragraph is also effectively removed from Section 6.1.3.
This document does not impact the security of the Internet.
