The DTNRG Research Group has defined the experimental Licklider Transmission Protocol (LTP) and the Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) mechanism for the InterPlanetary Network ('ipn' URI scheme).
Moreover, RFC 5050 defines values for the Bundle Protocol administrative record type.
All of these fields are subject to a registry.
For the purpose of its research work, the group has created ad hoc registries.
As the specifications are stable and have multiple interoperable implementations, the group would like to hand off the registries to IANA for official management.
This document describes the necessary IANA actions.
The DTNRG Research Group has defined the Licklider Transmission Protocol (LTP) [RFC5326].
LTP contains certain fields that are subject to a registry.
For the purpose of its research work, the group has created ad hoc registries.
As the specifications are stable and have multiple interoperable implementations, the group would like to hand off the registries to IANA for official management.
This document describes the actions that IANA needs to take and uses the well known IANA policy definitions as described in Section 4.1 of [RFC5226].
The Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) [RFC6260] specification defines the concepts of 'Node Number' and 'Service Number' in the 'ipn' URI scheme.
In this document, we request formation of IANA registries for these fields.
Because of its association with space communication and the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems [CCSDS], portions of the "CBHE Node Numbers", "CBHE Service Numbers", and "LTP Engine Numbers" spaces are delegated by this document to the CCSDS Space Assigned Numbers Authority [SANA].
SANA functions similarly to IANA in that it maintains registries of managed values, with a focus on values used by protocols used by CCSDS member agencies.
This document represents the consensus of the DTNRG.
It has been discussed and reviewed by the research group and interested parties.
This document requests the creation of registries managed by IANA.
There are no security issues involved.
Refer to the Security Considerations section of [RFC5326] for security issues with LTP.
IANA Considerations IANA has created the registries described in this section.
The Licklider Transmission Protocol has fields requiring registries managed by IANA.
This document requests the creation of the three registries in this section and requests that they be associated with the other LTP registries.
LTP Cancel Segment Reason Codes Section 3.2.4 of [RFC5326] defines the reason codes that may be present in Cancel Segments in LTP.
IANA has set up a registry to manage the cancel reason codes.
This registry, titled "LTP Cancel Segment Reason Codes", has been added to the list of registries associated with the Licklider Transmission Protocol.
The registration policy for this registry is Specification Required.
The Licklider Transmission Protocol has an LTP Engine ID field (Section 2 of [RFC5326]).
IANA has set up a registry to manage the Engine IDs.
This registry, titled "LTP Engine Numbers", has been added to the list of registries associated with the Licklider Transmission Protocol.
The registration policy for this registry is: 1
) 1  Expert Review required.
Allocated to the Space Assigned Numbers Authority ([SANA]) for use by Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) missions.
First Served basis for requests for less than or equal to 2  14 values to a single entity or organization.
Expert Review is required for requests of more than 2  14 values to a single entity or organization.
The LTP Engine ID is expressed as a Self Delimiting Numeric Value (SDNV) in LTP, and no maximum is specified in the protocol definition.
SDNVs are described in Section 4.1 of the Bundle Protocol specification [RFC5050] and in [RFC6256].
The Licklider Transmission Protocol has a client service ID number field (Section 3.2.1 of [RFC5326]).
IANA has set up a registry to manage LTP Client Service IDs.
This registry, titled "LTP Client Service Identifiers", has been added to the list of registries associated with the Licklider Transmission Protocol.
The registration policy for this registry is: 4
Allocated to the Space Assigned Numbers Authority ([SANA]) for use by Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) missions.
The LTP Client Service ID is expressed as a Self Delimiting Numeric Value (SDNV) in LTP, and no maximum value is specified in the protocol definition.
The CBHE specification [RFC6260] defines concepts of 'Node Number' and 'Service Number' that require registries managed by IANA.
The CBHE specification defines a Node Number (node nbr) field (Section 2.1 of [RFC6260]).
IANA has set up a registry to manage CBHE Node Numbers.
This registry, titled "CBHE Node Numbers", has been added to the list of registries associated with the Bundle Protocol.
The registration policy for this registry is: 1
) 1  Expert Review required.
Allocated to the Space Assigned Numbers Authority ([SANA]) for use by Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) missions.
First Served basis for requests for less than or equal to 2  14 values to a single entity or organization.
Expert Review is required for requests of more than 2  14 values to a single entity or organization.
The CBHE Node Number is expressed as a Self Delimiting Numeric Value (SDNV) in the CBHE specification.
Allowable values for the Node Number range from 1
The Compressed Bundle Header Encoding specification defines a Service Number (service nbr) field (Section 2.1 of [RFC6260]).
IANA has set up a registry to manage CBHE Service Numbers.
This registry, titled "CBHE Service Numbers", has been added to the list of registries associated with the Bundle Protocol.
The registration policy for this registry is: 0 63  Specification Required.
Allocated to the Space Assigned Numbers Authority ([SANA]) for use by Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) missions.
1024 2  16 1  Specification Required.
The CBHE Service Number is expressed as a Self Delimiting Numeric Value (SDNV) in the CBHE specification.
Allowable values for the Service Number range from 1
Bundle Administrative Record Types Section 6.1 of the Bundle Protocol specification [RFC5050] specifies a 4 bit Administrative Record type code.
IANA has set up a registry to manage these record types.
This registry, titled "Bundle Administrative Record Types", has been added to the list of registries associated with the Bundle Protocol.
The registration policy for this registry is Specification Required.
