NETWORK HOST STATUS This RFC reports on the status of most Network Hosts from July 31 to August 4.
Several Hosts are currently excluded from the daily testing as they are presently intended to be users only.
Included here are the Terminal IMPs, which are presently in the Network (AMES, MITRE, RADC, NBS, ETAC, USC, GWC, NOAA, SAAC, ARPA, and BBN ).
This category also includes the Network Control Center computer (Network address 5) which is used solely for gathering statistics from the Network.
Finally, included among these Hosts are the following:
The tables on the next two pages summarize the Host status for this period.
Ellen Westheimer left BBN to return to school on August 4.
We therefore will discontinue the publication of these summaries.
It is my understanding that UCLA NMC is considering the publica  tion of similar, although more detailed, survey data in the near future; I hope that data will serve in lieu of these reports.
In addition, of course, MIT DMCG has had survey information available on line for some time (see RFC #308, NIC 9259.)
The BBN Terminal IMP (Network Address 158) is a prototype and as such is frequently not connected to the Network, but being used to refine and debug the Terminal IMP programs.
Bob Braden (Telnet in June)
The NMC is a research site and would like to have a prior arrangement with each user.
(Destination Host either dead or inaccessible [due to network partitioning or local IMP failure] from the BBN Terminal IMP.)
(Destination Host opened a connection, informed user that all Network ports were in use, and immediately closed the connection.)
H   1/2 Open (Destination Host opened a connection but then either immediately closed it, or did not respond any further.)
(Destination Host opened a connection and was accessible to users.)
(Destination Host did not complete the ICP and open a connection within 60 seconds.)
The only service currently offered by the UCLA IBM 360/91 is a Network Job Service (NETRJS), however, the BBN Terminal IMP is not equipped to test NETRJS.
We are assuming that initial connection to the NETRJS logger indicates that NETRJS is also functioning.
#These sites advertise that they may not have their system available at these times.
[ direction of Alex McKenzie.
