Abstract RFC 2648 defines the "ietf" URN namespace and a number of sub  namespaces.
RFC 3553 defines an additional sub namespace, "params", and creates a registry to document allocations under that.
But there is no registry that lists, in one place, all sub namespaces of "ietf".
This document creates and populates such a registry, thereby changing the mechanism defined in RFC 2648 for adding new sub  namespaces of "ietf".
"A URN Namespace for IETF Documents" [RFC2648] defines the "ietf" URN namespace and a number of sub namespaces.
"An IETF URN Sub namespace for Registered Protocol Parameters" [RFC3553] defines an additional sub namespace, "params", and creates a registry to document allocations under that.
But there is no registry that lists, in one place, all sub namespaces of "ietf".
This document creates and populates such a registry, thereby changing the mechanism defined in RFC 2648 for adding new sub namespaces of "ietf".
There is currently a top level registry group called "IETF Protocol Parameter Identifiers", which contains one registry, "IETF URN Sub  namespace for Registered Protocol Parameters".
IANA has taken the following three actions: Action 1: Renamed the group "IETF Protocol Parameter Identifiers", giving it the new name "Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace for IETF Use".
The existing registry in that group remains, and its name is unchanged.
Its registration procedure has been updated to "IETF Review" (formerly called "IETF Consensus").
Action 2: Added a new registry to the renamed group.
The new registry is called "IETF URN Sub namespaces", and new registrations will use the IETF Review policy [RFC5226], which provides for IETF consensus in order to add a new URN namespace under "ietf".
The new registry appears first in the group, to provide a human friendly, top down resolution of the namespace hierarchy.
Action 3: Populated the new registry as follows:
IETF URN Sub namespaces Registration Procedures: IETF Review Reference:
Note: This is the Official Registry for sub namespaces of the 'IETF' URN Namespace.
This is a procedural document and is entirely unrelated to security.
