Abstract The RFC Payload Format for Uncompressed Video, RFC 4175, defines a scheme to packetise uncompressed, studio quality, video streams for transport using RTP.
This memo extends the format to support additional colour sampling modes.
The RTP Payload Format for Uncompressed Video [1] defines a scheme to packetise uncompressed, studio quality, video streams for transport using RTP [2].
A range of standard and high definition video formats is supported, and parameters are defined so sender and receiver can negotiate the image size, colour space, pixel depth, and colour sampling mode.
A limitation of the signalling is that the number of bits per sample is assumed to be the same for each colour component.
For example, it is possible to signal video using RGB colour sampling with 8 bits for each of the Red, Green, and Blue components (24 bits per pixel), but
not video using RGB colour sampling with 5 bits each for the Red and Blue components, but 6 bits for the Green component (16 bits per pixel).
Such video formats can easily be transported by the payload format, but cannot be signalled using the parameters defined.
This memo extends [1] with additional colour sampling modes, to signal such video formats.
Conventions Used in this Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3].
This memo defines six new colour sampling modes that MAY be signalled for use with [1].
These sampling modes use the same packing order of samples as do the RGB and BGR colour sampling modes, respectively (Section 4.3 of [1]), except that an additional bit per sample of colour depth MUST be used for the component marked by the   symbol.
The mandatory parameter "depth N" indicates that N bits per sample are used by the unmarked components, but N 1 bits are used by the marked component.
All other features of the payload format are as defined in [1].
The primary use of these colour sampling modes is to enable efficient packing of data into small pixel groups ("pgroups").
The most common use case is expected to be video with "depth 5", where the additional bit of colour depth for the marked component enables a single pixel to fit into two octets without padding.
The new colour sampling modes MAY be used for other depths, however, should that prove useful.
A common uncompressed video format is RGB with 5 bits for the Red and Blue components and 6 bits for the Green component, for a total of 16 bits per pixel.
Using the sampling modes defined in this memo, this can be signalled in Session Description Protocol (SDP) according to the following example: v 0
m video 51372 RTP/AVP 99 a rtpmap:99 raw/90000 a fmtp:99 sampling RG B
; width 1024; height 768; depth 5; colorimetry SMPTE240
The last line has been wrapped due to formatting constraints of this memo, and forms one complete line in the SDP file.
The security considerations of [1] apply.
No additional security considerations are introduced by support for new colour sampling modes.
The video/raw media type is extended with six new values for the "sampling" parameter according to the rules defined in Section 6.2 of [1].
