Abstract This document defines initial assignments of IPv6 Sub Top Level Aggregation Identifiers (Sub TLA ID) to the Address Registries.
It is intended as technical input to the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) from the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Internet Protocol
Next Generation (IPNG) and Next Generation Transition (NGTRANS)
working groups, as an input to the process of developing guidelines for the allocation of IPv6 addresses.
This document was originally developed to provide advice to IANA in the fall of 1998 and is being published at this time for the historical record.
The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) subsequently requested that the IANA delegate these assignments to the Address Registries.
The IANA did this and the Address Registries are now using them to assign IPv6 addresses.
This document was originally developed to provide advice to IANA in the fall of 1998 and is being published at this time for the historical record.
The IAB subsequently requested that the IANA delegate these assignments to the Address Registries.
The IANA did this and the Address Registries are now using them to assign IPv6 addresses.
This document defines initial assignments of IPv6 Sub TLA Aggregation Identifiers (Sub TLA ID) to the Address Registries.
It is intended as technical input to the IANA from the IETF IP
Next Generation (IPNG) and Next Generation Transition (NGTRANS)
working groups, as an input to the process of developing guidelines for the allocation of IPv6 addresses.
The IAB and IESG have authorized the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) as the appropriate entity to have the responsibility for the management of the IPv6 address space as defined in [ALLOC].
The proposed initial assignment described in the document is consistent with: RFC 2373,"IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture" [ARCH] RFC 2374 "An Aggregatable Global Unicast Address Format"
[AGGR] RFC 2450 "Proposed TLA and NLA Assignment Rules" [TLA RULES] 2.
Background [TLA RULES] specifies that TLA assignments will be done in two stages.
The first stage is to allocate a Sub TLA ID.
This document specifies the initial assignments of Sub TLA ID's to the Registries.
As defined in [TLA RULES] Section 5.1: "Sub TLA ID's are assigned out of TLA ID 0x0001
Note that use of the Reserved field to create the Sub TLA field is specific to TLA ID 0x0001.
It does not affect any other TLA.
This is the Format Prefix used to identify aggregatable global unicast addresses.
This is the TLA ID assigned by the IANA for Sub TLA allocation.
Sub TLA ID   Sub TLA Aggregation Identifier The Sub TLA ID field is used by the registries for initial allocations to organizations meeting the requirements in Section 5.2 of this document.
The IANA will assign small blocks (e.g., few hundred) of Sub TLA ID's to registries.
The registries will assign the Sub TLA ID's to organizations meeting the requirements specified in Section 5.2.
When the registries have assigned all of their Sub TLA ID's they can request that the IANA give them another block.
The blocks do not have to be contiguous.
The IANA may also assign Sub TLA ID's to organizations directly.
This includes the temporary TLA assignment for testing and experimental usage for activities such as the 6bone or new approaches like exchanges.
Next Level Aggregation ID's are used by organizations assigned a TLA ID to create an addressing hierarchy and to identify sites.
The organization can assign the top part of the NLA ID in a manner to create an addressing hierarchy appropriate to its network."
In the above quote from [TLA RULES] the references to "Section 5.2" refer to section 5.2 in [TLA RULES].
As specified in [TLA RULES], Sub TLA ID assignments are made in blocks.
The initial Sub TLA ID assignments to IP address registries are in blocks of 64 Sub TLA IDs.
These assignments are listed below.
X  2001:1000::/29 2001:11F8::/29   (future assignment) .
All other Sub TLA ID values not listed above are reserved.
When a registry has assigned all of the Sub TLA IDs in their block they can request that the IANA provide another block.
The blocks assigned to a registry do not have to be contiguous.
The block of Sub TLA IDs assigned to the IANA (i.e., 2001:0000::/29 2001:01F8::/29) is for assignment for testing and experimental usage to support activities such as the 6bone, and for new approaches like exchanges.
IPv6 addressing documents do not have any direct impact on Internet infrastructure security.
Authentication of IPv6 packets is defined in [AUTH].
Authentication of the ownership of prefixes to avoid "prefix stealing" is a related security issue but is beyond the scope of this document.
