Abstract This document describes a URN (Uniform Resource Name) namespace that is engineered by the Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) for naming persistent resources published by OASIS (such as OASIS Standards, XML (Extensible Markup Language)
Document Type Definitions, XML Schemas, Namespaces, Stylesheets, and other documents).
Introduction The Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) produces many kinds of documents: specifications, working drafts, technical resolutions, schemas, stylesheets, etc.
OASIS wishes to provide global, distributed, persistent, location  independent names for these resources.
The Extensible Markup Language (XML) requires that all resources provide a system identifier, which must be a URI, in addition to an optional public identifier (which provides an alternate mechanism for constructing identifiers) and many evolving specifications require authors to identify documents by URI alone (XML Namespaces, XML Schema, XSLT, etc.).
Motivated by these observations, OASIS would like to assign URNs to some resources in order to retain unique, permanent location  independent names for them.
This namespace specification is for a formal namespace.
Specification Template Namespace ID: "oasis" requested.
Registration Version Number: 3 Registration Date: 2001 02
05 Declared registrant of the namespace:
Karl Best OASIS Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards Post Office Box
455 Billerica, MA USA 01821
667 5115 Declaration of structure: The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs assigned by OASIS will have the following hierarchical structure: There are two branches at the top of the hierarchy: "names" and "member".
The NSS in the names hierarchy begins with a document class identifier.
There are three classes of identifiers: "specification", "tc", and "technical".
Specifications The "specification" hierarchy is for OASIS Specifications.
The general structure of the NSS in the specification hierarchy has the form:
urn:oasis:names:specification:{specification id} :{type}{:subtype}?:{document id} where "specification id" is a unique identifier for the specification
, "type" identifies the document type (document, schema, stylesheet, entity, xmlns, etc.), the optional "subtype" provides additional information about the document type (for example, stylesheet or schema language), and "document id" is a unique identifier for the document.
The Director of Technical Operations at OASIS assigns document types, subtypes, and all unique identifiers.
The "tc" hierarchy is for work products of OASIS Technical Committees.
The general structure of the NSS in the tc hierarchy has the form:
id}:{type}{:subtype}?:{document id} where "tc id" is a unique identifier for the Technical Committee, and the remaining fields are assigned as per the specification hierarchy.
The "technical" hierarchy identifies legacy documents (Technical Notes, Resolutions, Memoranda, and Research Papers).
The general structure of the NSS in the "technical" hierarchies has the form:
The document type is one of the following: "note", "resolution", "memorandum", or "researchpaper".
The document and amendment identifiers are derived from the legacy system for naming these documents.
The document identifier consists of a two digit year and a sequential number, the amendment identifier is the year of the amendment.
The NSS in the members hierarchy begins with a unique member identifier assigned by OASIS.
The string following the member identifier is opaque.
x The member identifiers will be assigned by The Director of Technical Operations at OASIS.
The opaque string is defined by the owner of the branch that begins with "urn:oasis:member:{member id}:".
: Identifier uniqueness will be enforced by the Director of Technical Operations who assigns unique identifiers to all documents identified by URN.
Identifier persistence considerations: OASIS is committed to maintaining the accessibility and persistence of all the resources that are assigned URNs.
Assignment is limited to the owner and those authorities that are specifically designated by the owner.
OASIS will assign portions of its namespace (specifically, those under the members hierarchy) for assignment by other parties.
Process of identifier resolution: The owner will distribute catalogs (OASIS TR9401 Catalogs) that map the assigned URNs to resource identifiers (e.g., URLs).
A more interactive, online resolution system will also be deployed in the near future.
The owner will authorize additional resolution services as appropriate.
Rules for Lexical Equivalence: URNs are lexically equivalent if they are lexically identical.
Conformance with URN Syntax: No special considerations.
The owner will publish OASIS TR9401 Catalogs.
The presence of a URN in a catalog indicates that it is valid.
The following examples are not guaranteed to be real.
They are listed for pedagogical reasons only.
There are no additional security considerations other than those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.
