Abstract This document establishes an IETF URN Sub namespace for use with OAuth related specifications.
Introduction Various extensions and companion specifications to the OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework [OAUTH V2] utilize URIs to identify the extension in use or other relevant context.
This document creates and registers an IETF URN Sub namespace, as documented in RFC 3553 [RFC3553], for use with such specifications.
The new 'oauth' Sub  namespace is urn:
ietf:params:oauth, and OAuth relevant parameters will be established underneath it.
If a registrant wishes to have an OAuth URI registered, then a URN of the form urn:
params:oauth:<value> will be requested where <value> is a suitable representation of the functionality or concept being registered.
The registration procedure for new entries requires a request in the form of the following template and is "Specification Required" per RFC 5226
The URI that identifies the registered functionality.
The name by which the functionality being registered is generally known.
Change Controller:  For Standards Track RFCs, state "IETF".
For others, give the name of the responsible party.
Other details (e.g., postal address, email address, and home page URI) may also be included.
:  Reference to the document that specifies the URI, preferably including a URI that can be used to retrieve a copy of the document.
An indication of the relevant sections may also be included but is not required.
The registration request for the urn:ietf:
URN Sub  namespace is found in the IANA Considerations section of this document (Section 4).
The following is an example registration request for a URI underneath the urn:ietf:params:oauth Sub namespace.
The requested URI represents a new OAuth 2.0 grant type.
This is a request to IANA to please register the value
"grant type:example" in the registry urn:ietf:params:oauth established in an IETF URN Sub namespace for OAuth.
An Example Grant Type for OAuth 2.0  Change controller:
IETF  Specification Document: [the document URI] 3.
There are no additional security considerations beyond those already inherent to using URNs.
Security considerations for URNs in general can be found in RFC 2141 [RFC2141].
Any work that is related to OAuth would benefit from familiarity with the security considerations of the OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework [OAUTH V2].
IANA Considerations IANA has created the following:
The registration of a new IANA URN Sub namespace, urn:ietf:params:oauth:, per RFC 3553 [RFC3553].
The registration request can be found in Section 4.1 below.
A new registry called the "OAuth URI" registry for URNs subordinate to urn:ietf:params:oauth.
The registry "OAuth URI" has been added to a new top level registry called "OAuth Parameters" as defined by [OAUTH V2].
Instructions for a registrant to request the registration of such a URN are in Section 2.
Sub Namespace Registration urn:ietf:params:oauth Per RFC 3553
[RFC3553], IANA has registered a new URN Sub namespace, urn:ietf:params:oauth.
Registry name: oauth  Specification: [
The registry created in Section 2.]
Index value: values subordinate to urn:ietf:params
:oauth are of the form urn:ietf:params:oauth:<value> with <value> as the index value.
