Abstract A stateful Path Computation Element (PCE) maintains information on the current network state received from the Path Computation Clients (PCCs), including computed Label Switched Paths (LSPs), reserved resources within the network, and pending path computation requests.
This information may then be considered when computing the path for a new traffic engineered LSP or for any associated/dependent LSPs.
The path computation response from a PCE helps the PCC to gracefully establish the computed LSP.
The Hierarchical Path Computation Element (H PCE) architecture allows the optimum sequence of interconnected domains to be selected and network policy to be applied if applicable, via the use of a hierarchical relationship between PCEs.
Combining the capabilities of stateful PCE and the hierarchical PCE would be advantageous.
This document describes general considerations and use cases for the deployment of stateful, but not stateless, PCEs using the hierarchical PCE architecture.
The Path Computation Element communication Protocol (PCEP)
[RFC5440] provides mechanisms for Path Computation Elements (PCEs) to perform path computations in response to the requests of Path Computation Clients (PCCs).
A stateful PCE is capable of considering, for the purposes of path computation, not only the network state in terms of links and nodes (referred to as the Traffic Engineering Database or TED) but also the status of active services (previously computed paths, and currently reserved resources, stored in the Label Switched Paths Database (LSPDB).
[RFC8051] describes general considerations for a stateful PCE deployment; it also examines its applicability and benefits as well as its challenges and limitations through a number of use cases.
[RFC8231] describes a set of extensions to PCEP to provide stateful control.
For its computations, a stateful PCE has access to not only the information carried by the network's Interior Gateway Protocol (IGP), but also the set of active paths and their reserved resources.
The additional state allows the PCE to compute constrained paths while considering individual LSPs and their interactions.
[RFC8281] describes the setup, maintenance, and teardown of PCE initiated LSPs under the stateful PCE model.
[RFC8231] also describes the active stateful PCE.
The active PCE functionality allows a PCE to reroute an existing LSP, make changes to the attributes of an existing LSP, or delegate control of specific LSPs to a new PCE.
The ability to compute constrained paths for Traffic Engineering (TE) LSPs in Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) networks across multiple domains has been identified as a key motivation for PCE development.
[RFC6805] describes a Hierarchical PCE (H PCE) architecture that can be used for computing end to end paths for interdomain
MPLS TE and GMPLS Label Switched Paths (LSPs).
Within the H PCE architecture [RFC6805], the Parent PCE (P PCE) is used to compute a multidomain path based on the domain connectivity information.
A Child PCE (C PCE) may be responsible for a single domain or multiple domains.
The C PCE is used to compute the intradomain path based on its domain topology information.
This document presents general considerations for stateful PCEs, and not stateless PCEs, in the hierarchical PCE architecture.
It focuses on the behavior changes and additions to the existing stateful PCE mechanisms (including PCE
initiated LSP setup and active stateful PCE usage) in the context of networks using the H PCE architecture.
In this document, Sections 3.1 and 3.2 focus on end to end (E2E) interdomain TE LSP.
Section 3.3.1 describes the operations for stitching per domain LSPs.
Use Cases and Applicability of Hierarchical Stateful PCE
As per [RFC6805], in the hierarchical PCE architecture, a P PCE maintains a domain topology map that contains the child domains and their interconnections.
Usually, the P PCE has no information about the content of the child domains.
But, if the PCE is applied to the Abstraction and Control of TE Networks (ACTN)
[RFC8453] as described in [RFC8637], the Provisioning Network Controller (PNC) can provide an abstract topology to the Multi Domain Service Coordinator (MDSC).
Thus, the P PCE in MDSC could be aware of topology information in much more detail than just the domain topology.
In a PCEP session between a PCC (ingress) and a C PCE, the C PCE acts as per the stateful PCE operations described in [RFC8231] and [RFC8281].
The same C PCE behaves as a PCC on the PCEP session towards the P PCE.
The P PCE is stateful in nature; thus, it maintains the state of the interdomain LSPs that are reported to it.
The interdomain LSP could also be delegated by the C PCE to the P PCE, so that the P PCE could update the interdomain path.
The trigger for this update could be the LSP state change reported for this LSP or any other LSP.
It could also be a change in topology at the P PCE, such as interdomain link status change.
In case of use of stateful H PCE in ACTN, a change in abstract topology learned by the P PCE could also trigger the update.
Some other external factors (such as a measurement probe) could also be a trigger at the P PCE.
Any such update would require an interdomain path recomputation as described in [RFC6805].
The end to end interdomain path computation and setup is described in [RFC6805].
Additionally, a per domain stitched LSP model is also applicable in a P PCE initiation model.
Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 describe the end to end contiguous LSP setup, whereas Section 3.3.1 describes the per domain stitching.
Applicability to ACTN [RFC8453] describes a framework for the Abstraction and Control of TE Networks (ACTN), where each Provisioning Network Controller (PNC) is equivalent to a C PCE, and the P PCE is the Multi Domain Service Coordinator (MDSC).
The per domain stitched LSP
is well suited for ACTN deployments, as per the hierarchical PCE architecture described in Section 3.3.1 of this document and Section 4.1 of [RFC8453].
[RFC8637] examines the applicability of PCE to the ACTN framework.
To support the function of multidomain coordination via hierarchy, the hierarchy of stateful PCEs plays a crucial role.
In the ACTN framework, a Customer Network Controller (CNC) can request the MDSC to check whether there is a possibility to meet Virtual Network (VN) requirements before requesting that the VN be provisioned.
The H PCE architecture as described in [RFC6805] can support this function using Path Computation Request and Reply (PCReq and PCRep, respectively) messages between the P PCE and C PCEs.
When the CNC requests VN provisioning, the MDSC decomposes this request into multiple interdomain LSP provisioning requests, which might be further decomposed into per domain path segments.
This is described in Section 3.3.1.
The MDSC uses the LSP initiate request (PCInitiate) message from the P PCE towards the C PCE, and
the C PCE reports the state back to the P PCE via a Path Computation State Report (PCRpt) message.
The P PCE could make changes to the LSP via the use of a Path Computation Update Request (PCUpd) message.
In this case, the P PCE (as MDSC) interacts with multiple C PCEs (as PNCs) along the interdomain path of the LSP.
End to End Contiguous LSP Different signaling
options for interdomain RSVP TE are identified in [RFC4726].
Contiguous LSPs are achieved using the procedures of [RFC3209] and [RFC3473] to create a single end to end LSP that spans all domains.
[RFC6805] describes the technique for establishing the optimum path when the sequence of domains is not known in advance.
That document shows how the PCE architecture can be extended to allow the optimum sequence of domains to be selected and the optimum end  to end path to be derived.
A stateful P PCE has to be aware of the interdomain LSPs for it to consider them during path computation.
For instance, when a domain  diverse path is required from another LSP, the P PCE needs to be aware of the LSP.
This is the passive stateful P PCE, as described in Section 3.1.
Additionally, the interdomain LSP could be delegated to the P PCE, so that P PCE could trigger an update via a PCUpd message.
The update could be triggered on receipt of the PCRpt message that indicates a status change of this LSP or some other LSP.
The other LSP could be an associated LSP (such as a protection LSP [RFC8745]) or an unrelated LSP whose resource change leads to reoptimization at the P PCE.
This is the active stateful operation, as described in Section 3.2.
Further, the P PCE could be instructed to create an interdomain LSP on its own using the PCInitiate message for an E2E contiguous LSP.
The P PCE would send the PCInitiate message to the ingress domain C PCE, which would further instruct the ingress PCC.
In this document, for the contiguous LSP, the above interactions are only between the ingress domain C PCE and the P PCE.
The use of stateful operations for an interdomain LSP between the transit/egress domain C PCEs and the P PCE is out of the scope of this document.
Applicability of a Stateful P PCE
[RFC8051] describes general considerations for a stateful PCE deployment and examines its applicability and benefits, as well as its challenges and limitations, through a number of use cases.
These are also applicable to the stateful P PCE when used for the interdomain LSP path computation and setup.
It should be noted that though the stateful P PCE has limited direct visibility inside the child domain, it could still trigger reoptimization with the help of child PCEs based on LSP state changes, abstract topology changes, or some other external factors.
The C PCE would delegate control of the interdomain LSP to the P PCE so that the P PCE can make changes to it.
Note that, if the C PCE becomes aware of a topology change that is hidden from the P PCE, it could take back the delegation from the P PCE to act on it itself.
Similarly, a P PCE could also request delegation if it needs to make a change to the LSP (refer to [RFC8741]).
The terminology is as per [RFC4655], [RFC5440], [RFC6805], [RFC8051], [RFC8231], and [RFC8281].
Some key terms are listed below for easy reference.
Customer Network Controller C PCE:
Child Path Computation Element H PCE:
Hierarchical Path Computation Element IGP:
Multi Domain Service Coordinator PCC:
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
As described in [RFC6805], in the hierarchical PCE architecture, a P PCE maintains a domain topology map that contains the child domains (seen as vertices in the topology) and their interconnections (links in the topology).
Usually, the P PCE has no information about the content of the child domains.
Each child domain has at least one PCE capable of computing paths across the domain.
These PCEs are known as Child PCEs (C PCEs)
[RFC6805] and have a direct relationship with the P PCE.
The P PCE builds the domain topology map either via direct configuration or from learned information received from each C PCE.
The network policy could be applied while building the domain topology map.
This has been described in detail in [RFC6805].
Note that, in the scope of this document, both the C PCEs and the P PCE are stateful in nature.
[RFC8231] specifies new functions to support a stateful PCE.
It also specifies that a function can be initiated either from a PCC towards a PCE (C E) or from a PCE towards a PCC (E C).
This document extends these functions to support H PCE Architecture from a C PCE towards P PCE (EC EP) or from a P PCE towards C PCE (EP  EC).
All PCE types herein (EC EP and EP EC) are assumed to be "stateful PCE".
A number of interactions are expected in the hierarchical stateful PCE architecture.
These include: LSP State Report (EC EP):
A child stateful PCE sends an LSP state report to a parent stateful PCE to indicate the state of an LSP.
LSP State Synchronization (EC EP):  After the session between the child and parent stateful PCEs is initialized, the P PCE must learn the state of the C PCE's TE LSPs.
LSP Control Delegation (EC EP, EP EC):
A C PCE grants to the P PCE the right to update LSP attributes on one or more LSPs
; at any time, the C PCE may withdraw the delegation or the P PCE may give up the delegation.
LSP Update Request (EP EC):  A stateful P PCE requests modification of attributes on a C PCE's TE LSP.
PCE LSP Initiation Request (EP EC):
A stateful P PCE requests a C PCE to initiate a TE LSP.
Note that this hierarchy is recursive, so a Label Switching Router (LSR),
as a PCC, could delegate control to a PCE.
That PCE may, in turn, delegate to its parent, which may further delegate to its parent (if it exists).
Similarly, update operations can also be applied recursively.
[RFC8685] defines the H PCE CAPABILITY TLV that is used in the Open message to advertise the H PCE capability.
[RFC8231] defines the STATEFUL PCE CAPABILITY TLV used in the Open message to indicate stateful support.
To indicate the support for stateful H PCE operations described in this document, a PCEP speaker MUST include both TLVs in an Open message.
It is RECOMMENDED that any implementation that supports stateful operations [RFC8231] and H PCE [RFC8685] also implement the stateful H PCE operations as described in this document.
Further consideration may be made for optional procedures for stateful communication coordination between PCEs, including procedures to minimize computational loops.
The procedures described in [PCE STATE SYNC] facilitate stateful communication between PCEs for various use cases.
The procedures and extensions as described in Section 3 of [PCE STATE SYNC] are also applicable to child and parent PCE communication.
The SPEAKER IDENTITY ID TLV (defined in [RFC8232]) is included in the LSP object to identify the ingress (PCC).
The PCEP specific identifier for the LSP
(PLSP ID [RFC8231]) used in the forwarded PCRpt by the C PCE to the P PCE is the same as the original one used by the PCC.
Passive Operations Procedures described in [RFC6805] are applied, where the ingress PCC triggers a path computation request for the destination towards the C PCE in the domain where the LSP originates.
The C PCE further forwards the request to the P PCE.
The P PCE selects a set of candidate domain paths based on the domain topology and the state of the interdomain links.
It then sends computation requests to the C PCEs responsible for each of the domains on the candidate domain paths.
Each C PCE computes a set of candidate path segments across its domain and sends the results to the P PCE.
The P PCE uses this information to select path segments and concatenate them to derive the optimal end to end interdomain path.
The end to end path is then sent to the C PCE that received the initial path request, and this C PCE passes the path on to the PCC that issued the original request.
As per [RFC8231], the PCC sends an LSP State Report carried on a PCRpt message to the C PCE, indicating the LSP's status.
The C PCE may further propagate the State Report to the P PCE.
A local policy at the C PCE may dictate which LSPs are reported to the P PCE.
The PCRpt message is sent from C PCE to P PCE.
State synchronization mechanisms as described in [RFC8231] and
[RFC8232] are applicable to a PCEP session between C PCE and P PCE as well.
We use the hierarchical domain topology example from [RFC6805] as the reference topology for the entirety of this document.
It is shown in Figure 1.
Example Steps 1 to 11 are exactly as described in Section 4.6.2 of [RFC6805]
("Hierarchical PCE End to End Path Computation Procedure"); the following additional steps are added for stateful PCE, to be executed at the end: (A)
The ingress LSR initiates the setup of the LSP as per the path and reports the LSP status to PCE1 ("GOING UP").
PCE1 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
PCE1 of the LSP state when the state is "UP".
PCE1 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
The ingress LSR could trigger path reoptimization by sending the path computation request as described in [RFC6805]; at this time, it can include the LSP object in the PCReq message, as described in [RFC8231].
Active Operations [RFC8231] describes the case of an active stateful PCE.
The first is sent by the PCE to a PCC for modifying LSP attributes.
The PCC sends back a PCRpt to acknowledge the requested operation or report any change in the LSP's state.
As per [RFC8051], delegation is an operation to grant a PCE temporary rights to modify a subset of LSP parameters on the LSPs of one or more PCCs.
The C PCE may further choose to delegate to its P PCE based on a local policy.
The PCRpt message with the "D" (delegate) flag is sent from C PCE to P PCE.
To update an LSP, a PCE sends an LSP Update Request to the PCC using a PCUpd message.
For an LSP delegated to a P PCE via the C PCE, the P PCE can use the same PCUpd message to request a change to the C PCE (the ingress domain PCE).
The C PCE further propagates the update request to the PCC.
The P PCE uses the same mechanism described in Section 3.1 to compute the end to end path using PCReq and PCRep messages.
For active operations, the following steps are required when delegating the LSP, again using the reference architecture described in Figure 1 ("Hierarchical Domain Topology Example").
The ingress LSR delegates the LSP to PCE1 via a PCRpt message with D flag set.
PCE1 further delegates the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
Steps 4 to 10 in Section 4.6.2 of [RFC6805]
are executed at P PCE (PCE5) to determine the end to end path.
The P PCE (PCE5) sends the update request to the C PCE (PCE1) via PCUpd message.
PCE1 further updates the LSP to the ingress LSR (PCC).
The ingress LSR initiates the setup of the LSP as per the path and reports the LSP status to PCE1 ("GOING UP").
PCE1 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
PCE1 of the LSP state when the state is "UP".
PCE1 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
[RFC8281] describes the setup, maintenance, and teardown of PCE
initiated LSPs under the stateful PCE model, without the need for local configuration on the PCC, thus allowing for a dynamic network that is centrally controlled and deployed.
To instantiate or delete an LSP, the PCE sends the Path Computation LSP initiate request (PCInitiate) message to the PCC.
In the case of an interdomain LSP in hierarchical PCE architecture, the initiation operations can be carried out at the P PCE.
In that case, after the P PCE finishes the E2E path computation, it can send the PCInitiate message to the C PCE (the ingress domain PCE), and the C PCE further propagates the initiate request to the PCC.
The following steps are performed for PCE initiated operations, again using the reference architecture described in Figure 1 ("Hierarchical Domain Topology Example")
The P PCE (PCE5) is requested to initiate an LSP.
Steps 4 to 10 in Section 4.6.2 of [RFC6805] are executed to determine the end  to end path.
The P PCE (PCE5) sends the initiate request to the child PCE (PCE1) via PCInitiate message.
PCE1 further propagates the initiate message to the ingress LSR (PCC).
The ingress LSR initiates the setup of the LSP as per the path and reports to PCE1 the LSP status ("GOING UP").
PCE1 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
PCE1 of the LSP state when the state is "UP".
PCE1 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
The ingress LSR (PCC) generates the PLSP ID for the LSP and inform the C PCE, which is propagated to the P PCE.
The hierarchical PCE architecture, as per [RFC6805], is primarily used for E2E LSP.
With PCE initiated capability, another mode of operation is possible, where multiple intradomain LSPs are initiated in each domain and are further stitched to form an E2E LSP.
The P PCE sends PCInitiate message to each C PCE separately to initiate individual LSP segments along the domain path.
These individual per  domain LSPs are stitched together by some mechanism, which is out of the scope of this document
The following steps are performed for the per domain stitched LSP operation, again using the reference architecture described in Figure 1 ("Hierarchical Domain Topology Example")
The P PCE (PCE5) is requested to initiate an LSP.
Steps 4 to 10 in Section 4.6.2 of [RFC6805] are executed to determine the end  to end path, which is broken into per domain LSPs.
It should be noted that the P PCE may use other mechanisms to determine the suitable per domain LSPs (apart from [RFC6805]).
For LSP (BN33 D): (B)
The P PCE (PCE5) sends the initiate request to the child PCE (PCE3) via a PCInitiate message for the LSP (BN33 D).
PCE3 further propagates the initiate message to BN33.
BN33 initiates the setup of the LSP as per the path and reports to PCE3 the LSP status ("GOING UP").
PCE3 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
The node BN33 notifies PCE3 of the LSP state when the state is "UP".
PCE3 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
For LSP (BN41 BN33): (H)
The P PCE (PCE5) sends the initiate request to the child PCE (PCE4) via PCInitiate message for LSP (BN41 BN33).
PCE4 further propagates the initiate message to BN41.
BN41 initiates the setup of the LSP as per the path and reports to PCE4 the LSP status ("GOING UP").
PCE4 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
The node BN41 notifies PCE4 of the LSP state when the state is "UP".
PCE4 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
For LSP (S BN41): (N)
The P PCE (PCE5) sends the initiate request to the child PCE (PCE1) via a PCInitiate message for the LSP (S BN41).
PCE1 further propagates the initiate message to node S. (P)
S initiates the setup of the LSP as per the path and reports to PCE1 the LSP status ("GOING UP").
PCE1 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
The node S notifies PCE1 of the LSP state when the state is "UP".
PCE1 further reports the status of the LSP to the P PCE (PCE5).
Once the P PCE receives a report of each per domain LSP, it should use a suitable stitching mechanism, which is out of the scope of this document.
In this step, the P PCE (PCE5) could also initiate an E2E LSP (S D) by sending the PCInitiate message to the ingress C PCE (PCE1).
Note that each per domain LSP can be set up in parallel.
Further, it is also possible to stitch the per domain LSP at the same time as the per domain LSPs are initiated.
This option is defined in [STATEFUL INTERDOMAIN].
The security considerations listed in [RFC8231], [RFC6805], and [RFC5440] apply to this document, as well.
As per [RFC6805], it is expected that the parent PCE will require all child PCEs to use full security (i.e., the highest security mechanism available for PCEP) when communicating with the parent.
Any multidomain operation necessarily involves the exchange of information across domain boundaries.
This is bound to represent a significant security and confidentiality risk, especially when the child domains are controlled by different commercial concerns.
PCEP allows individual PCEs to maintain the confidentiality of their domain path information using path keys [RFC5520], and the hierarchical PCE architecture is specifically designed to enable as much isolation of information about domain topology and capabilities as is possible.
The LSP state in the PCRpt message must continue to maintain the internal domain confidentiality when required.
The security considerations for PCE initiated LSP in [RFC8281] are also applicable from P PCE to C PCE.
Further, Section 6.3 describes the use of a path key [RFC5520] for confidentiality between C PCE and P PCE.
Thus, it is RECOMMENDED to secure the PCEP session (between the P PCE and the C PCE) using Transport Layer Security (TLS) [RFC8446] (per the recommendations and best current practices in BCP 195 [RFC7525])
and/or TCP Authentication Option (TCP AO)
The guidance for implementing PCEP with TLS can be found in [RFC8253].
In the case of TLS, due care needs to be taken while exposing the parameters of the X.509 certificate   such as subjectAltName:
otherName, which is set to Speaker Entity Identifier [
RFC8232] as per [RFC8253]   to ensure uniqueness and avoid any mismatch.
All manageability requirements and considerations listed in [RFC5440], [RFC6805], [RFC8231], and [RFC8281] apply to stateful H PCE defined in this document.
In addition, requirements and considerations listed in this section apply.
Control of Function and Policy Support of the hierarchical procedure will be controlled by the management organization responsible for each child PCE.
The parent PCE must only accept path computation requests from authorized child PCEs.
If a parent PCE receives a report from an unauthorized child PCE, the report should be dropped.
All mechanisms described in [RFC8231] and [RFC8281] continue to apply.
An implementation should allow the operator to view the stateful and H PCE capabilities advertised by each peer.
The "ietf pcep" PCEP YANG module is specified in [PCE PCEP YANG].
This YANG module will be required to be augmented to also include details for stateful H PCE deployment and operation.
The exact model and attributes are out of scope for this document.
Liveness Detection and Monitoring Mechanisms defined in this document do not imply any new liveness  detection or monitoring requirements in addition to those already listed in [RFC5440].
Verification of Correct Operations Mechanisms defined in this document do not imply any new operation  verification requirements in addition to those already listed in [RFC5440] and [RFC8231].
Requirements on Other Protocols Mechanisms defined in this document do not imply any new requirements on other protocols.
Impact on Network Operations Mechanisms defined in [RFC5440] and [RFC8231] also apply to PCEP extensions defined in this document.
The stateful H PCE technique brings the applicability of stateful PCE (described in [RFC8051]) to the LSP traversing multiple domains.
As described in Section 3, a PCEP speaker includes both the H PCE  CAPABILITY TLV [RFC8685] and STATEFUL PCE CAPABILITY TLV [RFC8231] to indicate support for stateful H PCE.
Note that there is a possibility of a PCEP speaker that does not support the stateful H PCE feature but does provide support for stateful PCE
[RFC8231] and H PCE [RFC8685] features.
This PCEP speaker will also include both the TLVs; in this case, a PCEP peer could falsely assume that the stateful H PCE feature is also supported.
On further PCEP message exchange, the stateful messages will not be propagated further (as described in this document), and a stateful H PCE based "parent" control of the LSP will not happen.
A PCEP peer should be prepared for this eventuality as a part of normal procedures.
Error Handling between PCEs Apart from the basic error handling described in this document, an implementation could also use the enhanced error and notification mechanism for stateful H PCE operations described in [PCE ENHANCED ERRORS].
Enhanced features such as error behavior propagation, notification, and error criticality level are further defined in [PCE ENHANCED ERRORS].
Applicability to Interlayer Traffic Engineering
[RFC5623] describes a framework for applying the PCE based architecture to interlayer (G)MPLS traffic engineering.
The H PCE stateful architecture with stateful P PCE coordinating with the stateful C PCEs of higher and lower layer is shown in Figure 2.
All procedures described in Section 3 are also applicable to interlayer path setup, and therefore to separate domains.
It should be noted that if all the C PCEs were to report all the LSPs in their domain, it could lead to scalability issues for the P PCE.
Thus, it is recommended to only report the LSPs that are involved in H PCE
i.e., the LSPs that are either delegated to the P PCE or initiated by the P PCE.
Scalability considerations for PCEP as per [RFC8231] continue to apply for the PCEP session between child and parent PCE.
As described in Section 4.2 of [RFC6805], information about the content of child domains is not shared, for both scaling and confidentiality reasons.
The child PCE could also conceal the path information during path computation.
A C PCE may replace a path segment with a path key [RFC5520], effectively hiding the content of a segment of a path.
This document has no IANA actions.
Contributors Avantika ECI Telecom India Email:
avantika.srm@gmail.com Xian Zhang Huawei Technologies Bantian, Longgang District Guangdong Shenzhen, 518129
I D Don Ramon de la Cruz 82
