Abstract This document provides specifications for one Bandwidth Constraints Model for Diffserv aware MPLS Traffic Engineering, which is referred to as the Maximum Allocation Model.
Introduction [DSTE REQ] presents the Service Providers requirements for support of Diffserv aware MPLS Traffic Engineering (DS TE).
This includes the fundamental requirement to be able to enforce different Bandwidth Constraints for different classes of traffic.
[DSTE REQ] also defines the concept of Bandwidth Constraints Model for DS TE and states that "The DS TE technical solution MUST specify at least one Bandwidth Constraints Model and MAY specify multiple Bandwidth Constraints Models.
" This document provides a detailed description of one particular Bandwidth Constraints Model for DS TE, which is introduced in [DSTE REQ] and called the Maximum Allocation Model (MAM).
[DSTE PROTO] specifies the IGP and RSVP TE signaling extensions for support of DS TE.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
a number of definitions from [DSTE REQ] are repeated here: Class Type (CT): the set of Traffic Trunks crossing a link that is governed by a specific set of Bandwidth Constraints.
CT is used for the purposes of link bandwidth allocation, constraint based routing, and admission control.
A given Traffic Trunk belongs to the same CT on all links.
A pair of: i. a Class Type ii.
a preemption priority allowed for that Class  Type.
This means that an LSP transporting a Traffic Trunk from that Class Type can use that preemption priority as the set up priority, as the holding priority or both.
A number of recovery mechanisms, under investigation or specification in the IETF, take advantage of the concept of bandwidth sharing across particular sets of LSPs.
"Shared Mesh Restoration" in [GMPLS RECOV] and "Facility based Computation Model" in [MPLS BACKUP] are example mechanisms that increase bandwidth efficiency by sharing bandwidth across backup LSPs protecting against independent failures.
To ensure that the notion of "Reserved (CTc)" introduced in [DSTE REQ] is compatible with such a concept of bandwidth sharing across multiple LSPs, the wording of the "Reserved (CTc)" definition provided in [DSTE REQ] is generalized into the following: Reserved (CTc): For a given Class Type CTc ( 0 <  c <  MaxCT ), let us define "Reserved(CTc)" as the total amount of the bandwidth reserved by all the established LSPs which belong to CTc.
With this generalization, the Maximum Allocation Model definition provided in this document is compatible with Shared Mesh Restoration defined in [GMPLS RECOV], so that DS TE and Shared Mesh Protection can operate simultaneously.
This assumes that Shared Mesh Restoration operates independently within each DS TE Class Type and does not operate across Class Types (for example, backup LSPs protecting Primary LSPs of CTx also need to belong to CTx; Excess Traffic LSPs sharing bandwidth with Backup LSPs of CTx also need to belong to CTx).
We also introduce the following definition: Reserved(CTb,q)
: Let us define "Reserved(CTb,q)" as the total amount of the bandwidth reserved by all the established LSPs that belong to CTb and have a holding priority of q.  Note that if q and CTb do not form one of the 8 possible configured TE Classes, then there cannot be any established LSPs that belongs to CTb and has a holding priority of q; therefore, in this case, Reserved(CTb,q)
Maximum Allocation Model Definition MAM is defined in the following manner:
Maximum Number of Bandwidth Constraints (MaxBC)
Maximum Number of Class Types (MaxCT)   8 for each value of c in the range 0
<  BCc <  Max Reservable Bandwidth, SUM (Reserved(CTc))
Max Reservable Bandwidth where the SUM is across all values of c in the range 0 <  c <
A DS TE LSR implementing MAM MUST support enforcement of Bandwidth Constraints in compliance with this definition.
To increase the degree of bandwidth sharing among the different CTs, the sum of Bandwidth Constraints may exceed the Maximum Reservable Bandwidth, so that the following relationship may hold true:
SUM (BCc) > Max Reservable Bandwidth, where the SUM is across all values of c in the range 0 <  c
The sum of Bandwidth Constraints may also be equal to (or below) the Maximum Reservable Bandwidth.
In that case, the Maximum Reservable Bandwidth does not actually constrain CT bandwidth reservations (in other words, the 3rd bullet item of the MAM definition above will never effectively come into play).
This is because the 2nd bullet item of the MAM definition above implies that: SUM (reserved(CTc))
Both preemption within a CT and across CTs is allowed.
Where 8 CTs are active, the MAM Bandwidth Constraints can also be expressed in the following way: All LSPs from CT7 use no more than BC7 All LSPs from CT6 use no more than BC6 All LSPs from CT5 use no more than BC5 etc.
All LSPs from CT0 use no more than BC0 All LSPs from all CTs collectively use no more than the Maximum Reservable Bandwidth Purely for illustration purposes, the diagram below represents MAM in a pictorial manner when 3 CTs are active:
(Note that, in this illustration, the sum BC0   BC1   BC2 exceeds the Max Reservable Bandwidth.)
While more flexible/sophisticated Bandwidth Constraints Models can be defined (and are indeed defined; see [DSTE RDM]), the Maximum Allocation Model is attractive in some DS TE environments for the following reasons: Network administrators generally find MAM simple and intuitive MAM matches simple bandwidth control policies that Network Administrators may want to enforce, such as setting an individual Bandwidth Constraint for a given type of traffic (a.k.a. Class Type) and simultaneously limit the aggregate of reserved bandwidth across all types of traffic.
MAM can be used in a way which ensures isolation across Class  Types, whether preemption is used or not.
MAM can simultaneously achieve isolation, bandwidth efficiency, and protection against QoS degradation of the premium CT.
MAM only requires limited protocol extensions such as the ones defined in [DSTE PROTO].
MAM may not be attractive in some DS TE environments because: MAM cannot simultaneously achieve isolation, bandwidth efficiency, and protection against QoS degradation of CTs other than the Premium CT.
Additional considerations on the properties of MAM, and its comparison with RDM, can be found in [BC CONS] and [BC MODEL].
As a very simple example of usage of MAM, a network administrator using one CT for Voice (CT1) and one CT for Data (CT0) might configure on a given 2.5 Gb/s link: BC0   2 Gb/s (i.e., Data is limited to 2 Gb/s)
(i.e., Voice is limited to 1 Gb/s)
(i.e., aggregate Data   Voice is limited to 2.5 Gb/s) 4.
Example Formulas for Computing "Unreserved TE Class [i]" with Maximum Allocation Model
As specified in [DSTE PROTO], formulas for computing "Unreserved TE  Class [i]" MUST reflect all of the Bandwidth Constraints relevant to the CT associated with TE Class[i], and thus, depend on the Bandwidth Constraints Model.
Thus, a DS TE LSR implementing MAM MUST reflect the MAM Bandwidth Constraints defined in Section 3 when computing "Unreserved TE Class [i]".
As explained in [DSTE PROTO], the details of admission control algorithms, as well as formulas for computing "Unreserved TE Class [i]", are outside the scope of the IETF work.
Keeping that in mind, we provide in this section an example, for illustration purposes, of how values for the unreserved bandwidth for TE Class[i] might be computed with MAM.
In the example, we assume the use of the basic admission control algorithm, which simply deducts the exact bandwidth of any established LSP from all of the Bandwidth Constraints relevant to the CT associated with that LSP.
Security Considerations Security considerations related to the use of DS TE are discussed in [DSTE PROTO].
Those apply independently of the Bandwidth Constraints Model, including MAM specified in this document.
IANA Considerations [DSTE PROTO] defines a new name space for "Bandwidth Constraints Model Id".
The guidelines for allocation of values in that name space are detailed in section 13.1 of [DSTE PROTO].
In accordance with these guidelines, IANA has assigned a Bandwidth Constraints Model Id for MAM from the range 0 239 (which is to be managed as per the "Specification Required" policy defined in [IANA CONS]).
Id 1 was allocated by IANA to MAM.
This Appendix provides examples of how the Maximum Allocation Bandwidth Constraints Model can be used to support each of the scenarios described in [DSTE REQ].
Limiting Amount of Voice By configuring on every link:
Bandwidth Constraint 1 (for CT1   Voice)
"certain percentage" of link capacity Bandwidth Constraint 0 (for CT0   Data)
link capacity (or a constraint specific to data traffic)
Bandwidth   link capacity By configuring: every CT1/Voice TE LSP with preemption   0
every CT0/Data TE LSP with preemption   1 DS TE with the Maximum Allocation Model will address all the requirements: amount of Voice traffic limited to desired percentage on every link data traffic capable of using all remaining link capacity (or up to its own specific constraint) voice traffic capable of preempting other traffic A.2.
: Maintain Relative Proportion of Traffic Classes By configuring on every link: BC2 (for CT2)
e.g., 45% of link capacity BC1 (for CT1)
e.g., 35% of link capacity BC0 (for CT0)   e.g., 100% of link capacity
link capacity DS TE with the Maximum Allocation Model will ensure that the amount of traffic of each CT established on a link is within acceptable levels as compared to the resources allocated to the corresponding Diffserv Per Hop Behaviors (PHBs) regardless of which order the LSPs are routed in, regardless of which preemption priorities are used by which LSPs and regardless of failure situations.
By also configuring: every CT2/Voice TE LSP with preemption   0
every CT1/Premium Data TE LSP with preemption   1
every CT0/Best Effort TE LSP with preemption   2 DS TE with the Maximum Allocation Model will also ensure that: CT2 Voice LSPs always have first preemption priority in order to use the CT2 capacity CT1 Premium Data LSPs always have second preemption priority in order to use the CT1 capacity Best Effort can use up to link capacity of what is left by CT2 and CT1.
Optional automatic adjustment of Diffserv scheduling configuration could be used for maintaining very strict relationships between the amounts of established traffic of each CT and corresponding Diffserv resources.
Guaranteed Bandwidth Services By configuring on every link: BC1 (for CT1)
"given" percentage of link bandwidth (appropriate to achieve the QoS objectives of the Guaranteed Bandwidth service) BC0 (for CT0   Data)
link capacity (or a constraint specific to data traffic)
link capacity DS TE with the Maximum Allocation Model will ensure that the amount of Guaranteed Bandwidth Traffic established on every link remains below the given percentage so that it will always meet its QoS objectives.
At the same time, it will allow traffic engineering of the rest of the traffic such that links can be filled up (or limited to the specific constraint for such traffic).
