Host Status Attached are the latest network maps   geographic and logical   and a list of Hosts connected to the ARPANET.
The geographic map shows all IMPs and TIPs currently installed in the subnetwork.
The logical map diagrams the current (as of Dec. 10, 1973) status of all computers on the net, with the exception of MIT MULTICS which is shown in the advanced state of being attached to IMP #44 rather than IMP #5.
(My apologies for not reprinting the map.)
Hosts with interfaces to the subnet are shown with intersected ovals; the small "v" represents a Very Distant Host (VDH) interface to the IMP; IMPs are the solid black circles and TIPs the circles with "T" enclosed.
The two jagged lines represent satellite links.
Note: The names listed on this map are unofficial IMP names, NOT official Host names.
The list of Hosts includes current sites as well as those projected to come onto the net within the next two months.
At the end is an incomplete list of installations to be connected further in the future.
Dates for connection have been included only for the next few months to prevent gross inaccuracy.
The Host's network address is given in octal and decimal.
Interfaces from the subnet to the particular computer are listed in parentheses and may be ignored.
A site is considered a Server or User of the network based on self proclamation.
Limited Server implies the site performs service functions but for a restricted group of users dedicated Servers implies the type of service is restricted, not the user group.
In all cases normal site access restrictions are observed.
Included in the status column is any special operating system available for that Host, that is not supplied by the computer manufacturer.
This RFC contains official Host names as of December, 1973.
Naming conventions and an official Hostname list, which will be maintained at the NIC by Jake Feinler (FEINLER@NIC), will be published in the ARPANEWS.
A version of this list will be available online at the NIC, the location to be announced with the official Hostname list.
(Other sites are encouraged to make copies of this list available on their own systems.)
User 1/74 PDP 11/45 043
The following hosts are scheduled to come onto the ARPANET in the Spring of 1974 or later.
Since their schedule was less firm they were not listed above.
ARPA Network, Geographic Map, November 1973; and ARPA Network, Logical Map, December 1973.)
