Abstract This document defines requirements for IPv6 nodes.
It is expected that IPv6 will be deployed in a wide range of devices and situations.
Specifying the requirements for IPv6 nodes allows IPv6 to function well and interoperate in a large number of situations and deployments.
The goal of this document is to define the common functionality required from both IPv6 hosts and routers.
Many IPv6 nodes will implement optional or additional features, but this document summarizes requirements from other published Standards Track documents in one place.
This document tries to avoid discussion of protocol details, and references RFCs for this purpose.
This document is informational in nature and does not update Standards Track RFCs.
Although the document points to different specifications, it should be noted that in most cases, the granularity of requirements are smaller than a single specification, as many specifications define multiple, independent pieces, some of which may not be mandatory.
As it is not always possible for an implementer to know the exact usage of IPv6 in a node, an overriding requirement for IPv6 nodes is that they should adhere to Jon Postel's Robustness Principle:
Be conservative in what you do, be liberal in what you accept from others [RFC 793].
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 2119].
It is intended that IPv6 will be deployed in many different situations and environments.
Therefore, it is important to develop the requirements for IPv6 nodes to ensure interoperability.
This document assumes that all IPv6 nodes meet the minimum requirements specified here.
Description of IPv6 Nodes From the Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification [RFC 2460], we have the following definitions: Description of an
a device that implements IPv6.
Description of an IPv6 router
a node that forwards IPv6 packets not explicitly addressed to itself.
Description of an IPv6 Host
any node that is not a router.
Abbreviations Used in This Document ATM
Asynchronous Transfer Mode AH    Authentication Header
DAD   Duplicate Address Detection ESP   Encapsulating Security Payload ICMP
Internet Key Exchange MIB   Management Information Base MLD
Multiple Access ND    Neighbor Discovery NS
Neighbor Unreachability Detection PPP   Point to Point Protocol PVC   Permanent Virtual Circuit SVC   Switched Virtual Circuit 3.
An IPv6 node must include support for one or more IPv6 link layer specifications.
Which link layer specifications are included will depend upon what link layers are supported by the hardware available on the system.
It is possible for a conformant IPv6 node to support IPv6 on some of its interfaces and not on others.
As IPv6 is run over new layer 2 technologies, it is expected that new specifications will be issued.
This section highlights some major layer 2 technologies and is not intended to be complete.
Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Ethernet Networks RFC 2464
Nodes supporting IPv6 over Ethernet interfaces MUST implement Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Ethernet Networks [RFC 2464].
IP version 6 over PPP
RFC 2472 Nodes supporting IPv6 over PPP MUST implement IPv6 over PPP [RFC 2472].
RFC 2492 Nodes supporting IPv6 over ATM Networks MUST implement IPv6 over ATM Networks [RFC 2492].
A minimally conforming IPv6/ATM driver SHALL support the PVC mode of operation.
An IPv6/ATM driver that supports the full SVC mode SHALL also support PVC mode of operation.
Internet Protocol Version 6 RFC 2460
The Internet Protocol Version 6 is specified in [RFC 2460].
This specification MUST be supported.
Unrecognized options in Hop by Hop Options or Destination Options extensions MUST be processed as described in RFC 2460.
The node MUST follow the packet transmission rules in RFC 2460.
Nodes MUST always be able to send, receive, and process fragment headers.
All conformant IPv6 implementations MUST be capable of sending and receiving IPv6 packets; the forwarding functionality MAY be supported.
RFC 2460 specifies extension headers and the processing for these headers.
A full implementation of IPv6 includes implementation of the following extension headers:
Routing (Type 0), Fragment, Destination Options, Authentication and Encapsulating Security Payload
An IPv6 node MUST be able to process these headers.
It should be noted that there is some discussion about the use of Routing Headers and possible security threats [IPv6 RH] that they cause.
Neighbor Discovery for IPv6 RFC 2461
Neighbor Discovery SHOULD be supported.
[RFC 2461] states: "Unless specified otherwise (in a document that covers operating IP over a particular link type)
this document applies to all link types.
However, because ND uses link layer multicast for some of its services, it is possible that on some link types (e.g., NBMA links) alternative protocols or mechanisms to implement those services will be specified (in the appropriate document covering the operation of IP over a particular link type).
The services described in this document that are not directly dependent on multicast, such as Redirects, Next hop determination, Neighbor Unreachability Detection, etc., are expected to be provided as specified in this document.
The details of how one uses ND on NBMA links is an area for further study.
Some detailed analysis of Neighbor Discovery follows:
Router Discovery is how hosts locate routers that reside on an attached link.
Router Discovery MUST be supported for implementations.
Prefix Discovery is how hosts discover the set of address prefixes that define which destinations are on link for an attached link.
Prefix discovery MUST be supported for implementations.
Neighbor Unreachability Detection (NUD) MUST be supported for all paths between hosts and neighboring nodes.
It is not required for paths between routers.
However, when a node receives a unicast Neighbor Solicitation (NS) message (that may be a NUD's NS), the node MUST respond to it (i.e., send a unicast Neighbor Advertisement).
Duplicate Address Detection MUST be supported on all links supporting link layer multicast (RFC 2462, Section 5.4, specifies DAD MUST take place on all unicast addresses).
A host implementation MUST support sending Router Solicitations.
Receiving and processing Router Advertisements MUST be supported for host implementations.
The ability to understand specific Router Advertisement options is dependent on supporting the specification where the RA is specified.
Sending and Receiving Neighbor Solicitation (NS) and Neighbor Advertisement (NA) MUST be supported.
NS and NA messages are required for Duplicate Address Detection (DAD).
Redirect functionality SHOULD be supported.
If the node is a router, Redirect functionality MUST be supported.
Path MTU Discovery and Packet Size
Path MTU Discovery RFC 1981 Path MTU Discovery [RFC 1981] SHOULD be supported, though minimal implementations MAY choose to not support it and avoid large packets.
The rules in RFC 2460 MUST be followed for packet fragmentation and reassembly.
ICMP for the Internet Protocol Version 6
[RFC 2463] MUST be supported.
IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture RFC 3513
The IPv6 Addressing Architecture [RFC 3513] MUST be supported as updated by [RFC 3879].
Stateless Address Autoconfiguration RFC 2462 IPv6 Stateless Address Autoconfiguration is defined in [RFC 2462].
This specification MUST be supported for nodes that are hosts.
Static address can be supported as well.
Nodes that are routers MUST be able to generate link local addresses as described in RFC 2462 [RFC 2462].
From 2462: The autoconfiguration process specified in this document applies only to hosts and not routers.
Since host autoconfiguration uses information advertised by routers, routers will need to be configured by some other means.
However, it is expected that routers will generate link local addresses using the mechanism described in this document.
In addition, routers are expected to successfully pass the Duplicate Address Detection procedure described in this document on all addresses prior to assigning them to an interface.
Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) MUST be supported.
Privacy Extensions for Address Configuration in IPv6 RFC 3041
Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration [RFC 3041] SHOULD be supported.
It is recommended that this behavior be configurable on a connection basis within each application when available.
It is noted that a number of applications do not work with addresses generated with this method, while other applications work quite well with them.
Default Address Selection for IPv6 RFC 3484
The rules specified in the Default Address Selection for IPv6 [RFC 3484] document MUST be implemented.
It is expected that IPv6 nodes will need to deal with multiple addresses.
Stateful Address Autoconfiguration Stateful Address Autoconfiguration MAY be supported.
[RFC 3315] is the standard stateful address configuration protocol; see Section 5.3 for DHCPv6 support.
Nodes which do not support Stateful Address Autoconfiguration may be unable to obtain any IPv6 addresses, aside from link local addresses, when it receives a router advertisement with the 'M' flag (Managed address configuration) set and that contains no prefixes advertised for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (see Section 4.5.2).
Additionally, such nodes will be unable to obtain other configuration information, such as the addresses of DNS servers when it is connected to a link over which the node receives a router advertisement in which the 'O' flag ("Other stateful configuration") is set.
Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) for IPv6 RFC 2710 Nodes that need to join multicast groups SHOULD implement MLDv2 [RFC 3810].
However, if the node has applications that only need support for Any Source Multicast [RFC 3569], the node MAY implement MLDv1 [RFC 2710] instead.
If the node has applications that need support for Source Specific Multicast [RFC 3569, SSM ARCH], the node MUST support MLDv2 [RFC 3810].
When MLD is used, the rules in the "Source Address Selection for the Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) Protocol" [RFC 3590] MUST be followed.
DNS DNS is described in [RFC 1034], [RFC 1035], [RFC 3152], [RFC 3363], and [RFC 3596].
Not all nodes will need to resolve names; those that will never need to resolve DNS names do not need to implement resolver functionality.
However, the ability to resolve names is a basic infrastructure capability that applications rely on and generally needs to be supported.
All nodes that need to resolve names SHOULD implement stub resolver [RFC 1034] functionality, as in RFC 1034, Section 5.3.1, with support for:  AAAA type Resource Records [RFC 3596];
reverse addressing in ip6.arpa using PTR records [RFC 3152];  EDNS0 [RFC 2671] to allow for DNS packet sizes larger than 512 octets.
Those nodes are RECOMMENDED to support DNS security extensions [RFC 4033], [RFC 4034], and [RFC 4035].
Those nodes are NOT RECOMMENDED to support the experimental A6 and DNAME Resource Records [RFC 3363].
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6) RFC 3315 5.2.1.
The method by which IPv6 nodes that use DHCP for address assignment can obtain IPv6 addresses and other configuration information upon receipt of a Router Advertisement with the 'M' flag set is described in Section 5.5.3 of RFC 2462.
In addition, in the absence of a router, those IPv6 nodes that use DHCP for address assignment MUST initiate DHCP to obtain IPv6 addresses and other configuration information, as described in Section 5.5.2 of RFC 2462.
Those IPv6 nodes that do not use DHCP for address assignment can ignore the 'M' flag in Router Advertisements.
The method by which IPv6 nodes that use DHCP to obtain other configuration information can obtain other configuration information upon receipt of a Router Advertisement with the 'O' flag set is described in Section 5.5.3 of RFC 2462.
Those IPv6 nodes that use DHCP to obtain other configuration information initiate DHCP for other configuration information upon receipt of a Router Advertisement with the 'O' flag set, as described in Section 5.5.3 of RFC 2462.
Those IPv6 nodes that do not use DHCP for other configuration information can ignore the 'O' flag in Router Advertisements.
An IPv6 node can use the subset of DHCP (described in [RFC 3736]) to obtain other configuration information.
Use of Router Advertisements in Managed Environments
Nodes using the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6) are expected to determine their default router information and on  link prefix information from received Router Advertisements.
IPv4 Support and Transition IPv6 nodes MAY support IPv4.
Transition Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers RFC 2893
If an IPv6 node implements dual stack and tunneling, then [RFC 4213] MUST be supported.
The Mobile IPv6 [RFC 3775] specification defines requirements for the following types of nodes:  mobile nodes  correspondent nodes with support for route optimization  home agents
all IPv6 routers Hosts MAY support mobile node functionality described in Section 8.5 of [RFC 3775], including support of generic packet tunneling [RFC  2473] and secure home agent communications [RFC 3776].
Hosts SHOULD support route optimization requirements for correspondent nodes described in Section 8.2 of [RFC 3775].
Routers SHOULD support the generic mobility related requirements for all IPv6 routers described in Section 8.3 of [RFC 3775].
Routers MAY support the home agent functionality described in Section 8.4 of [RFC 3775], including support of [RFC 2473] and [RFC 3776].
This section describes the specification of IPsec for the IPv6 node.
Basic Architecture Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol [RFC 4301] MUST be supported.
Security Protocols ESP [RFC 4303] MUST be supported.
AH [RFC 4302] MUST be supported.
8.3.  Transforms and Algorithms Current IPsec RFCs specify the support of transforms and algorithms for use with AH and ESP: NULL encryption, DES CBC, HMAC SHA 1 96, and HMAC MD5 96.
However, "Cryptographic Algorithm Implementation Requirements For ESP And AH" [RFC 4305] contains the current set of mandatory to implement algorithms for ESP and AH.
It also specifies algorithms that should be implemented because they are likely to be promoted to mandatory at some future time.
IPv6 nodes SHOULD conform to the requirements in [RFC 4305], as well as the requirements specified below.
Since ESP encryption and authentication are both optional, support for the NULL encryption algorithm [RFC 2410] and the NULL authentication algorithm [RFC 4303] MUST be provided to maintain consistency with the way these services are negotiated.
However, while authentication and encryption can each be NULL, they MUST NOT both be NULL.
The NULL encryption algorithm is also useful for debugging.
The DES CBC encryption algorithm [RFC 2405]
SHOULD NOT be supported within ESP.
Security issues related to the use of DES are discussed in [DESDIFF], [DESINT], and [DESCRACK].
DES CBC is still listed as required by the existing IPsec RFCs, but updates to these RFCs will be published in the near future.
DES provides 56 bits of protection, which is no longer considered sufficient.
The use of the HMAC SHA 1 96 algorithm [RFC 2404] within AH and ESP MUST be supported.
The use of the HMAC MD5 96 algorithm [RFC 2403] within AH and ESP MAY also be supported.
The 3DES CBC encryption algorithm [RFC 2451] does not suffer from the same security issues as DES CBC, and the 3DES CBC algorithm within ESP MUST be supported to ensure interoperability.
The AES 128 CBC algorithm [RFC 3602]
MUST also be supported within ESP.
AES 128 is expected to be a widely available, secure, and efficient algorithm.
While AES 128 CBC is not required by the current IPsec RFCs, it is expected to become required in the future.
An implementation MUST support the manual configuration of the security key and SPI.
The SPI configuration is needed in order to delineate between multiple keys.
Key management SHOULD be supported.
Examples of key management systems include IKEv2 [RFC 4306] and Kerberos; S/MIME and TLS include key management functions.
Where key refresh, anti replay features of AH and ESP, or on demand creation of Security Associations (SAs) is required, automated keying MUST be supported.
Key management methods for multicast traffic are also being worked on by the MSEC WG.
This section defines general host considerations for IPv6 nodes that act as routers.
Currently, this section does not discuss routing  specific requirements.
IPv6 Router Alert Option RFC 2711
The IPv6 Router Alert Option [RFC 2711] is an optional IPv6 Hop by  Hop Header that is used in conjunction with some protocols (e.g., RSVP [RFC 2205] or MLD [RFC 2710]).
The Router Alert option will need to be implemented whenever protocols that mandate its usage are implemented.
Neighbor Discovery for IPv6 RFC 2461 Sending Router Advertisements and processing Router Solicitation MUST be supported.
Network Management Network Management MAY be supported by IPv6 nodes.
However, for IPv6 nodes that are embedded devices, network management may be the only possible way of controlling these nodes.
Management Information Base Modules (MIBs)
The following two MIBs SHOULD be supported by nodes that support an SNMP agent.
MIB IP Forwarding Table MIB [RFC 4292] SHOULD be supported by nodes that support an SNMP agent.
Management Information Base for the Internet Protocol
(IP) IP MIB [RFC 4293]
SHOULD be supported by nodes that support an SNMP agent.
This document does not affect the security of the Internet, but implementations of IPv6 are expected to support a minimum set of security features to ensure security on the Internet.
"IP Security Document Roadmap" [RFC 2411] is important for everyone to read.
The security considerations in RFC 2460 state the following:
The security features of IPv6 are described in the Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol [RFC 2401].
RFC 2401 has been obsoleted by RFC 4301, therefore refer RFC 4301 for the security features of IPv6.
Editor's Contact Information Comments or questions regarding this document should be sent to the IPv6 Working Group mailing list (ipv6@ietf.org) or to: John Loughney Nokia Research Center Itamerenkatu 11 13 00180
358 50 483 6242 EMail: John.Loughney@Nokia.com
