Abstract This memo updates the registry of properties in Authentication  Results: message header fields to allow relaying of the results of a Vouch By Reference query.
Introduction [AUTHRES] defined a new header field for electronic mail messages that presents the results of a message authentication effort in a machine readable format.
In the interim, a proposal for rudimentary domain level reputation assessment, called Vouch By Reference, [VBR] was published and is now beginning to see popular use.
This memo thus registers an additional reporting property allowing a VBR result to be relayed as an annotation in a message header.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [KEYWORDS].
By Reference [VBR] introduced a mechanism by which a message receiver can query a "vouching" service to determine whether or not a trusted third party is willing to state that mail from a particular source can be considered legitimate.
When this assessment is done at an inbound border mail gateway, it would be useful to relay the result of that assessment to internal mail entities such as filters or user agents.
Reactions to the information contained in an Authentication Results header field that contains VBR (or any) results are not specified here, as they are entirely a matter of local policy at the receiver.
This memo adds to the "Email Authentication Methods" registry, created by IANA upon publication of [AUTHRES], the following:  The method "vbr"; and  Associated with that method, the properties (reporting items) "header.md" and "header.mv".
If "header.md" is present, its value MUST be the DNS domain name about which a VBR query was made.
If "header.mv" is present, its value MUST be the DNS domain name that was queried as the potential voucher for the "header.md" domain.
If the VBR query was made based on the content of a "VBR Info" header field present on an incoming message, "header.md" is typically taken from the "md" tag of the "VBR Info" header field, and "header.mv" is typically one of the values of the "mv" tag in the "VBR Info" header field on that message.
However, [VBR] permits a different mechanism for selection of the subject domain and/or list of vouchers, ignoring those present in any "VBR Info" header field the message might have included.
A server could even conduct a VBR query when no "VBR Info" field was present, based on locally configured policy options.
Where such mechanisms are applied, the verifying server MAY generate an Authentication Results field to relay the results of the VBR query.
This memo also adds to the "Email Authentication Result Names" registry the following result codes and definitions: none:  No valid VBR Info header was found in the message, or a domain name to be queried could not be determined.
A VBR query was completed, and the vouching service queried gave a positive response.
A VBR query was completed, and the vouching service queried did not give a positive response, or the message contained multiple VBR Info header fields with different "mc" values (see [VBR]).
A VBR query was attempted but could not be completed due to some error that is likely transient in nature, such as a temporary DNS error.
A later attempt may produce a final result.
A VBR query was attempted but could not be completed due to some error that is likely not transient in nature, such as a permanent DNS error.
A later attempt is unlikely to produce a final result.
Also, the following items have been added to the "Email Authentication Result Names" registry:
This memo creates a mechanism for relaying [VBR] results using the structure already defined by [AUTHRES].
The Security Considerations sections of those documents should be consulted.
Appendix A.  Authentication Results Examples
This section presents an example of the use of this new header field to indicate VBR results.
A message that triggered a VBR query, returning a result: Authentication Results: mail router.example.net; dkim pass (good signature)
header.md newyork.example.com header.mv voucher.example.org Received: from newyork.example.com (newyork.example.com [192.0.2.250]) by mail router.example.net (8.11.6/8.11.6) for <recipient@example.net> with ESMTP i
Fri, Feb 15 2002 17:19:22  0800 DKIM Signature: v 1; a rsa sha256; s rashani; d newyork.example.com; t 1188964191; c relaxed/simple; h From:Date:To:VBR Info:Message Id:Subject;
bh sEu28nfs9fuZGD/pSr7ANysbY3jtdaQ3Xv9xPQtS0m7 ; b oINEO8hgn/gnunsg ...
Fri, Feb 15 2002 16:54:30  0800
To: meetings@example.net VBR Info: md newyork.example.com; mc list; mv voucher.example.org
Subject: here's a sample Example 1:
Header Field Reporting Results from a VBR Query
Here we see an example of a message that was signed using DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) and that also included a VBR Info header field.
On receipt, it is found that the "md " field in the latter and the "d " field in the former matched, and also that the DKIM signature verified, so a VBR query was performed.
The vouching service, voucher.example.org, indicated that the sender can be trusted, so a "pass" result is included in the Authentication Results field affixed prior to delivery.
