Abstract This document proposes four cryptographic user interface suites ("UI suites") for IP Security (IPsec), similar to the two suites specified in RFC 4308.
The four new suites provide compatibility with the United States National Security Agency's Suite B specifications.
This document obsoletes RFC 4869, which presented earlier versions of these suites.
Introduction [RFC4308] proposes two optional cryptographic user interface suites ("UI suites") for IPsec.
The two suites, VPN A and VPN B, represent commonly used present day corporate VPN security choices and anticipated future choices, respectively.
[RFC4869] proposed four new UI suites based on implementations of the United States National Security Agency's Suite B algorithms (see [SuiteB]).
As with the VPN suites, the Suite B suites are simply collections of values for some options in IPsec.
Use of UI suites does not change the IPsec protocols in any way.
This document reduces the scope of the suites in [RFC4869] while retaining the original suite names.
A detailed list of the changes is given in Section 6.
This document obsoletes RFC 4869.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Each of the following UI suites provides choices for ESP (see [RFC4303]) and for Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) (see [RFC5996]).
The four suites are differentiated by the choice of cryptographic algorithm strengths, and a choice of whether the Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) is to provide both confidentiality and integrity or integrity only.
The suite names are based on the Advanced Encryption Standard [AES] mode and AES key length specified for ESP.
IPsec implementations that use these UI suites MUST use the suite names listed here.
IPsec implementations SHOULD NOT use names different than those listed here for the suites that are described, and MUST NOT use the names listed here for suites that do not match these values.
These requirements are necessary for interoperability.
Suite "Suite B GCM 128
" This suite provides ESP integrity protection and confidentiality using 128 bit AES GCM (see [RFC4106]).
This suite or the following suite should be used when ESP integrity protection and encryption are both needed.
256 bit random ECP group [RFC5903] 3.2.
Suite "Suite B GCM 256
" This suite provides ESP integrity protection and confidentiality using 256 bit AES GCM (see [RFC4106]).
This suite or the preceding suite should be used when ESP integrity protection and encryption are both needed.
384 bit random ECP group [RFC5903] 3.3.
Suite "Suite B GMAC 128
" This suite provides ESP integrity protection using 128 bit AES GMAC (see [RFC4543]) but does not provide confidentiality.
This suite or the following suite should be used only when there is no need for ESP encryption.
256 bit random ECP group [RFC5903] 3.4.
Suite "Suite B GMAC 256
" This suite provides ESP integrity protection using 256 bit AES GMAC (see [RFC4543]) but does not provide confidentiality.
This suite or the preceding suite should be used only when there is no need for ESP encryption.
384 bit random ECP group [RFC5903] 4.
This document inherits all of the security considerations of the IPsec and IKEv2 documents.
Some of the security options specified in these suites may be found in the future to have properties significantly weaker than those that were believed at the time this document was produced.
IANA Considerations IANA maintains a registry called "Cryptographic Suites for IKEv1, IKEv2, and IPsec" (see [IANA Suites]).
The registry consists of a text string and an RFC number that lists the associated transforms.
The four suites in this document have been listed with this document as the RFC reference.
These entries will be updated upon approval of this document.
The changes from [RFC4869] are: 1.
Removed definitions of the suites for IKEv1. 2.
Removed IKE authentication methods from the suite definitions.
These now appear in [RFC6380].
Removed the requirements on rekeying in IKEv2.
