Abstract Each Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse Mode (PIM SM) router in a PIM domain that supports Any Source Multicast (ASM) maintains Group to RP mappings that are used to identify a Rendezvous Point (RP) for a specific multicast group.
PIM SM has defined an algorithm to choose a RP from the Group to RP mappings learned using various mechanisms.
This algorithm does not consider the PIM mode and the mechanism through which a Group to RP mapping was learned.
This document defines a standard algorithm to deterministically choose between several Group to RP mappings for a specific group.
This document first explains the requirements to extend the Group to  RP mapping algorithm and then proposes the new algorithm.
Introduction Multiple mechanisms exist today to create and distribute Group to RP mappings.
Each PIM SM router may learn Group to RP mappings through various mechanisms, as described in Section 4.
It is critical that each router select the same 'RP' for a specific multicast group address; otherwise, full multicast connectivity will not be established.
This is true even when using an Anycast RP to provide redundancy.
This RP address may correspond to a different physical router, but it is one logical RP address and must be consistent across the PIM domain.
This is usually achieved by using the same algorithm to select the RP in all the PIM routers in a domain.
PIM SM [RFC4601] has defined an algorithm to select a 'RP' for a given multicast group address, but it is not flexible enough for an administrator to apply various policies.
Please refer to Section 3 for more details.
The PIM STD MIB [RFC5060] includes a number of objects to allow an administrator to set the precedence for Group to RP mappings that are learned statically or dynamically and stored in the 'pimGroupMappingTable'.
The Management Information Base (MIB) module also defines an algorithm that can be applied to the data contained in the 'pimGroupMappingTable' to determine Group to RP mappings.
However, this algorithm is not completely deterministic, because it includes an implementation specific 'precedence' value.
Network management stations will be able to deduce which RPs will be selected by applying the algorithm from this document to the list of Group to RP mappings from the 'pimGroupMappingTable'.
The algorithm provides MIB visibility into how routers will apply Group to RP mappings and also fixes the inconsistency introduced by the way that different vendors implement the selection of the Group to RP mappings to create multicast forwarding state.
Embedded RP, as defined in Section 7.1 of "Embedding the Rendezvous Point (RP) Address in an IPv6 Multicast Address" [RFC3956], specifies the following: "To avoid loops and inconsistencies, for addresses in the range
ff70::/12, the Embedded RP mapping MUST be considered the longest possible match and higher priority than any other mechanism".
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
This document also uses the following terms:  PIM Mode PIM Mode is the mode of operation for which a particular multicast group is used.
Wherever this term is used in this document, it refers to either Sparse Mode or Bidirectional
Dynamic Group to RP Mapping Mechanisms
The term "dynamic Group to RP mapping mechanisms" in this document refers to Bootstrap Router (BSR)
Dynamic Mappings and Dynamically Learned Mappings
The terms "dynamic mappings" and "dynamically learned mappings" refer to Group to RP mappings that have been learned by either BSR or Auto RP.
Group to RP mappings that have been learned by Embedded RP are referred to as Embedded Group to RP mappings.
Filtering Filtering is the selective discarding of dynamic Group to RP mapping information, based on the group address, the type of Group to RP mapping message, and the interface on which the mapping message was received.
The term "multicast domain" used in this document refers to a network topology that has a consistent set of Group to RP mappings.
The interface between two or more multicast domains is a multicast domain boundary.
The multicast boundaries are usually enforced by filtering the dynamic mapping messages and/or configuring different static RP mappings.
The existing algorithm defined in PIM SM
(Section 4.7.1 of [RFC4601]) does not consider the following constraints:
It does not consider the origin of a Group to RP mapping and therefore will treat all of them equally.
It does not provide the flexibility to give higher priority to a specific PIM mode.
For example, an entry learned for the PIM  BIDIR Mode is treated with the same priority as an entry learned for PIM SM.
The algorithm defined in this document updates the algorithm defined in PIM SM
The new algorithm is backward compatible and will produce the same result only if the Group to RP mappings are learned from a single mapping source.
The full benefits of the new algorithm will not be realized until it is widely deployed.
Assumptions We have made the following assumptions in defining this algorithm:  A Group to RP mapping can be learned from various mechanisms.
Dynamically learned mappings    Static configuration    Other mapping method  Embedded Group to RP mappings are special and always have the highest priority.
They cannot be overridden by static configuration or by dynamic Group to RP mappings.
Dynamic mappings will override a static RP configuration if they have overlapping ranges.
However, it is possible to override dynamic Group to RP mappings with static configurations, either by filtering, or by configuring longer static group addresses that override dynamic mappings when longest prefix matching is applied.
A Group to RP mapping learned for PIM BIDIR Mode
is preferred to an entry learned for PIM SM Mode as stipulated in Section 3.3 of [RFC5059].
Dynamic Group to RP mapping mechanisms are filtered at domain boundaries or for policy enforcement inside a domain.
Common Use Cases A network operator deploying IP Multicast will require a deterministic way to select the precedence for Group to RP mappings in the following use cases:  Default static Group to RP mappings with dynamically learned entries Many network operators will have a dedicated infrastructure for the standard multicast group range (224/4) and so might be using statically configured Group to RP mappings for this range.
In this case, to support some specific applications, they might want to learn Group to RP mappings dynamically using either the BSR or Auto RP mechanism.
In this case, to select Group to RP mappings for these specific applications, a longer prefix match should be given preference over statically configured Group to RP mappings.
For example, 239.100.0.0/16, an administratively scoped multicast address range, could be learned for a corporate communications application.
Network operators may change the Group to RP mappings for these applications more often, and the mappings would need to be learned dynamically.
This is not an issue for IPv6 Multicast address ranges.
Migration situations Network operators occasionally go through a migration due to an acquisition or a change in their network design.
In order to facilitate this migration, there is a need to have a deterministic behavior of Group to RP mapping selection for entries learned using the BSR and Auto RP mechanisms.
This will help in avoiding any unforeseen interoperability issues between different vendors' network elements.
A network management station can determine the RP for a specific group in a specific router by running this algorithm on the Group  to RP mapping table fetched using MIB objects.
The following algorithm deterministically chooses between several Group to RP mappings for a specific group.
It also addresses the above mentioned shortcomings in the existing mechanism.
If the multicast group address being looked up contains an embedded RP, the RP address extracted from the group address is selected as the Group to RP mapping.
If the multicast group address being looked up is in the Source Specific Multicast (SSM) range or is configured for Dense Mode, no Group to RP mapping is selected, and this algorithm terminates.
The fact that no Group to RP mapping has been selected can be represented in the PIM STD MIB module [RFC5060] by setting the address type of the RP to 'unknown', as described in Section 8.
From the set of all Group to RP mapping entries, the subset whose group prefix contains the multicast group that is being looked up is selected.
If there are no entries available, then the Group to RP mapping is undefined, and this algorithm terminates.
A longest prefix match is performed on the subset of Group to RP mappings.
If there is only one entry available, then that entry is selected as the Group to RP mapping.
If there are multiple entries available, the algorithm continues with this smaller set of Group to RP mappings.
From the remaining set of Group to RP mappings, we select the subset of entries based on the preference for the PIM modes to which the multicast group addresses are assigned.
A Group to RP mapping entry with PIM Mode 'BIDIR' will be preferred to an entry with PIM Mode 'PIM SM'.
If there is only one entry available, then that entry is selected as the Group to RP mapping.
If there are multiple entries available, the algorithm continues with this smaller set of Group to RP mappings.
From the remaining set of Group to RP mappings, we select the subset of the entries based on the origin.
Group to RP mappings learned dynamically are preferred over static mappings.
If the remaining dynamic Group to RP mappings are from BSR and Auto RP, then the mappings from BSR are preferred.
If there is only one entry available, then that entry is selected as the Group to RP mapping.
If there are multiple entries available, the algorithm continues with this smaller set of Group to RP mappings.
If the remaining Group to RP mappings were learned through BSR, then the RP will be selected by comparing the RP Priority values in the Candidate RP Advertisement messages.
The RP mapping with the lowest value indicates the highest priority [RFC5059].
If more than one RP has the same highest priority (i.e., the same lowest value), the algorithm continues with those Group  to RP mappings.
If the remaining Group to RP mappings were NOT learned from BSR, the algorithm continues with the next step.
If the remaining Group to RP mappings were learned through BSR and the PIM Mode of the group
is 'PIM SM', then the hash function as defined in Section 4.7.2 of [RFC4601] will be used to choose the RP.
The RP with the highest resulting hash value will be selected.
Please see Section 10 for consideration of hash for BIDIR PIM and BSR.
If more than one RP has the same highest hash value, the algorithm continues with those Group to RP mappings.
If the remaining Group to RP mappings were NOT learned from BSR, the algorithm continues with the next step.
From the remaining set of Group to RP mappings, the RP with the highest IP address (numerically greater) will be selected.
This will serve as a final tiebreaker.
Interpretation of MIB Objects As described in [RFC5060], the Group to RP mapping information is summarized in the pimGroupMappingTable.
The precedence value is stored in the 'pimGroupMappingPrecedence' object, which covers both the dynamically learned Group to RP mapping information and the static configuration.
For static configurations, the 'pimGroupMappingPrecedence' object uses the value of the 'pimStaticRPPrecedence' object from the pimStaticRPTable.
The algorithm defined in this document does not use the concept of precedence, and therefore the values configured in the 'pimGroupMappingPrecedence' and
'pimStaticRPPrecedence' objects in the PIM STD MIB module [RFC5060] are not applicable to the new algorithm.
The objects still retain their meaning for 'legacy' implementations, but since the algorithm defined in this document is to be used in preference to those found in PIM SM [RFC4601] and the PIM STD MIB [RFC5060], the values of these objects will be ignored on implementations that support the new algorithm.
An implementation of this specification can continue to be managed using the PIM STD MIB [RFC5060].
Group to RP mapping entries are created in the pimGroupMappingTable for group ranges that are SSM or Dense mode.
In these cases, the pimGroupMappingRPAddressType object is set to unknown(0), and the PIM Mode in the pimGroupMappingPimMode object is set to either ssm(2) or dm(5) to reflect the type of the group range.
Also, all the entries that are already included in the SSM Range table in the IP Multicast MIB [RFC5132] are copied to the pimGroupMappingTable.
Such entries have their type in the pimGroupMappingOrigin object set to configSsm(3) and the RP address type in the pimGroupMappingRPAddressType object set to unknown(0), as described above.
Use of Dynamic Group to RP Mapping Protocols
It is not usually necessary to run several dynamic Group to RP mapping mechanisms in one administrative domain.
Specifically, interoperation of BSR and Auto RP is OPTIONAL.
However, if a router does receive two overlapping sets of Group to RP mappings, for example from Auto RP and BSR, then some algorithm is needed to deterministically resolve the situation.
The algorithm in this document MUST be used on all routers in the domain.
This can be important at domain border routers, and is likely to avoid conflicts caused by misconfiguration (when routers receive overlapping sets of Group to RP mappings) and when configuration is changing.
An implementation of PIM that supports only one mechanism for learning Group to RP mappings MUST also use this algorithm.
The algorithm has been chosen so that existing standard implementations are already compliant.
Considerations for Bidirectional PIM and BSR Hash
BIDIR PIM [RFC5015] is designed to avoid any data driven events.
This is especially true in the case of a source only branch.
The RP mapping is determined based on a group mask when the mapping is received through a dynamic mapping protocol or statically configured.
Therefore, based on the algorithm defined in this document, the hash in BSR is ignored for PIM BIDIR RP mappings.
It is RECOMMENDED that network operators configure only one PIM BIDIR RP for each RP Priority.
Filtering Group to RP Mappings at Domain Boundaries
An implementation of PIM SHOULD support configuration to filter specific dynamic mechanisms for a valid group prefix range.
For example, it should be possible to allow an administratively scoped address range, such as 239/8, for the Auto RP protocol, but to filter out the BSR advertisement for the same range.
Similarly, it should be possible to filter out all Group to RP mappings learned from BSR or the Auto RP protocol.
This document enhances an existing algorithm to deterministically choose between several Group to RP mappings for a specific group.
Different routers may select a different Group to RP mapping for the same group if the Group to RP mappings learned in these routers are not consistent.
For example, let us assume that BSR is not enabled in one of the routers, and so it does not learn any Group to RP mappings from BSR.
the Group to RP mappings learned in this router may not be consistent with other routers in the network; it may select a different RP or may not select any RP for a given group.
Such situations can be avoided if the mechanisms used to learn Group  to RP mappings are secure and consistent across the network.
Secure transport of the mapping protocols can be accomplished by using authentication with IPsec, as described in Section 6.3 of [RFC4601].
