Abstract This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) "etsi" for Uniform Resource Names (URNs) used to identify resources published by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (http://etsi.org).
ETSI specifies and manages resources that utilize this URN identification model.
Management activities for these and other resource types are handled by the manager of the ETSI Protocol Naming and Numbering Service (PNNS).
Introduction ETSI is a nonprofit international industry standards organization that produces globally acceptable standards for information and communication technologies including fixed, mobile, radio, broadcast, internet, aeronautical, and other areas.
As part of these efforts, there is a need to specify identifiers in a managed namespace that are unique and persistent.
To ensure that this namespace's uniqueness is absolute, the registration of a specific Uniform Resource Name (URN)
Namespace Identifier (NID) for use by ETSI is specified in this document, in full conformance with the NID registration process specified in [RFC8141].
URN Specification for ETSI Namespace Identifier:
ETSI Protocol Naming and Numbering Service (PNNS)
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) 650, Route des Lucioles Sophia Antipolis 06560
The Namespace Identifier (NID) "etsi" for Uniform Resource Names (URNs) will be used to identify resources published by ETSI.
These might include published standards or protocols that ETSI defines and that make use of URNs.
These namespaces are globally unique.
The URN namespace will be used in public networks by clients to configure and manage resources in the network.
Servers will enforce the uniqueness of the namespaces by using the namespace and the XPath associated with the managed node in the network when accessing a resource.
The syntax of Namespace Specific Strings for the "etsi" namespace is <NSS> in Uniform Resource Names (URNs)
The entire URN is case insensitive.
Assignment: ETSI will maintain the list of registered subtrees that use the "etsi" NID in the "ETSI URN Namespace" registry at
The registry describes the <NSS>, how namespaces will be allocated, and how experimental namespaces can be used within the allocated URN.
ETSI will manage resource classes using the "etsi" NID and will be the authority for managing resources and associated subsequent strings.
ETSI will guarantee the uniqueness of the strings by validating them against the existing content of the registry.
ETSI may also permit secondary responsibility for certain defined resources.
Once a subtree assignment is made, it cannot be deleted or reassigned.
ETSI may allow use of experimental type values in specific subtrees for testing purposes only.
Note that using experimental types may create collision as multiple users may use the same values for different resources and specific strings.
All experimentation must follow the guidance set forth in "A Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace for Examples" [RFC6963].
Security and Privacy: See Section 4 of RFC 8515.
Interoperability: There are no known interoperability issues at this time.
Resolution: It is not foreseen that URNs within this namespace will undergo resolution.
Documentation can be found at
The following are examples of URNs that ETSI is looking to assign: urn:etsi:yang:
Although all of these examples are related to network management with YANG [RFC7950], URNs related to other kinds of resources might be assigned in the future, in which case a "sub identifier" other than "yang" might be created.
There are no additional security considerations apart from what are normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general, which are described in "Functional Requirements for Uniform Resource Names" [RFC1737] and "Uniform Resource Names (URNs)" [RFC8141].
IANA Considerations IANA has registered "etsi" in the "Formal URN Namespaces" registry using the template in Section 2.
