Abstract This memo resolves a duplication in the assignment of RSVP Message Types, by changing the Message Types assigned by RFC 2747 to Challenge and Integrity Response messages.
Introduction RFC 2747 ("RSVP Cryptographic Authentication")
[RFC2747] assigns RSVP Message Type 12 to an Integrity Response message, while RFC 2961 ("RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction Extensions") [RFC2961] assigns the same value to a Bundle message.
This memo resolves the conflict over RSVP Message Type 12 by assigning a different value to the Message Type of the Integrity Response Message in RFC 2747.
It is believed that the protocol defined by RFC 2961 entered use in the field before the RFC's publication and before the conflicting Message Type was noticed, and that it may be easier to install new software in environments that have deployed the Integrity object than in those that have deployed the refresh reduction extension.
To simplify possible interoperability problems caused by this change, we also assign a new value to the Message Type of RFC 2747's Challenge message, to which the Integrity Response message is a reply.
Modification Message Types defined in the RSVP Integrity extension [RFC 2747] shall be changed as follows:
Challenge message has Message Type 25.
Integrity Response message has Message Type 25 1.
Compatibility Two communicating nodes whose Integrity implementations are conformant with this modification will interoperate, using Message Type 12 for Bundle messages and Message Types 25 and 26 for the Integrity handshake.
A non conformant implementation of the Integrity extension will not interoperate with a conformant implementation (though two non conformant implementations can interoperate as before).
There is no possibility of an Integrity handshake succeeding accidentally due to this change, since both sides of the handshake use the new numbers or the old numbers.
Furthermore, the Integrity Response message includes a 32 bit cookie that must match a cookie in the Challenge message, else the challenge will fail.
Finally, a non conformant implementation should never receive a Bundle message that it interprets as an Integrity Response message, since RFC 2961 requires that Bundle messages be sent only to a Bundle capable node.
No new security considerations are introduced beyond RFC 2747 itself and the compatibility issues above.
