This Network Working Group Request for Comments documents the currently assigned values from several series of numbers used in network protocol implementations.
This RFC will be updated periodically, and in any case current information can be obtained from Jon Postel.
The assignment of numbers is also handled by Jon.
If you are developing a protocol or application that will require the use of a link, socket, etc.
please contact Jon to receive a number assignment.
Jon Postel USC Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
90291 phone: (213) 822 1511 ARPANET mail:
Most of the protocols mentioned here are documented in the RFC series of notes.
The more prominent and more generally used are documented in the Protocol Handbook [1] prepared by the Network Information Center (NIC).
In the lists that follow a bracketed number, e.g. [1], off to the right of the page indicates a reference for the listed protocol.
This list of network numbers is used in the internetwork, the field is 8 bits in size.
Assigned Network Numbers Decimal   Octal
Sill Packet Radio Network 6
Wide Band Satellite Network 29
In the Internet Protocol (IP) there is a field to identify the version of the internetwork general protocol.
This field is 4 bits in size.
In the Internet Protocol (IP)
[44] there is a field to identify the the next level protocol.
This field is 8 bits in size.
This field is called Protocol in the IP header.
Assigned Internet Protocol Numbers Decimal
PORT or SOCKET NUMBERS Ports are used in the TCP [46] and sockets are used in the AHHP [1,3] to name the ends of logical connections which carry long term conversations.
For the purpose of providing services to unknown callers a service contact socket is defined.
This list specifies the port or socket used by the server process as its contact socket.
In the AHHP an Initial Connection Procedure ICP [1,34] is used between the user process and the server process to make the initial contact and establish the long term connections leaving the contact socket free to handle other callers.
In the TCP no ICP is necessary since a port may engage in many simultaneous connections.
100 177   Hosts Specific Functions 128 223
Use 224 255   340 377
unassigned Reserved for Future Use
340 347   unassigned 232 237
The word "link" here refers to a field in the original ARPANET Host/IMP interface leader.
The link was originally defined as an 8 bit field.
Some time after the ARPANET Host to Host (AHHP) protocol was defined and, by now, some time ago the definition of this field was changed to "Message ID" and the length to 12 bits.
The name link now refers to the high order 8 bits of this 12 bit message id field.
The low order 4 bits of the message
id field are to be zero unless specifically specified otherwise for the particular protocol used on that link.
The Host/IMP interface is defined in BBN report 1822
304 377   Experimental Protocols 224 255
