Abstract The P Served User header field was defined based on a requirement from the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) in order to convey the identity of the served user, his/ her registration state, and the session case that applies to that particular communication session and application invocation.
A session case is metadata that captures the status of the session of a served user regardless of whether or not the served user is registered or the session originates or terminates with the served user.
This document updates RFC 5502 by defining a new P Served User header field parameter, "orig cdiv".
The parameter conveys the session case used by a proxy when handling an originating session after Call Diversion (CDIV) services have been invoked for the served user.
This document also fixes the ABNF in RFC 5502 and provides more guidance for using the P Served User header field in IP networks.
The P Served User header field [RFC5502]
was defined based on a requirement from the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) in order to convey the identity of the served user, his/her registration state, and the session case between a Serving Call Session Control Function (S CSCF) and an Application Server (AS) on the IMS Service Control (ISC) interface.
A session case is metadata that captures the status of the session of a served user regardless of whether or not the served user is registered or the session originates or terminates with the served user.
For more information on session cases and the IMS, a detailed description can be found in [TS.3GPP.24.229].
[RFC5502] defines the originating and terminating session cases for a registered or unregistered user.
This document extends the P Served  User header field to include the session case for a forwarded leg when both a CDIV service has been invoked and an originating service of the diverting user has to be triggered.
The sessioncase param parameter of the P Served User header field is extended with the "orig cdiv" parameter for this originating after  CDIV session case.
The following section defines usage of the "orig cdiv" parameter of the P Served User header field, Section 3 discusses the applicability and scope of this new header field parameter, and Section 4 specifies the proxy behavior for handling the new header field parameter.
Section 5 clarifies some of the [RFC5502] procedures, Section 6 describes the extended syntax and corrects the syntax of [RFC5502], Section 7 gives some call flow examples,
Section 8 registers the P Served User header field parameters with IANA, and Section 9 discusses the security properties of the environment where this new header field parameter is intended to be used.
In the 3GPP IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem), the S CSCF (Serving CSCF) is a SIP proxy that serves as a registrar and handles originating and terminating session states for users assigned to it.
This means that any call that is originated by a specific user or any call that is terminated to that specific user will pass through the S CSCF that is assigned to that user.
At the moment that an S CSCF is assigned to a specific user, the user profile is downloaded from the Home Subscriber Server (HSS) to that S CSCF; see [TS.3GPP.29.228].
The user profile contains the list of actions to be taken by the S CSCF for the served user depending on the session direction (originating or terminating) and the user state (registered or not) in the IMS network.
the S CSCF determines the current case and applies the corresponding actions such as forwarding the request to an AS.
The AS then goes through a similar process of determining who is the current served user, what is his/her "registration state", and what is the "session case" of the session.
[RFC5502] defines all those parameters and in particular the originating and terminating session cases.
In basic call scenarios, there is no particular issue for the S CSCF and AS to know which scenario needs to be realized, but in case of CDIV services for which the session is re targeted, the session cases defined in [RFC5502] pose some limitations as described in the following section.
Problem Statement To illustrate the problem statement, let's imagine Alice trying to call Bob and Bob having a CDIV service activated towards Carol's address.
In the case of a CDIV service, the received request is first treated as a terminating session case (at Bob's side), and the terminating filter criteria configured in the S CSCF is performed.
A filter criteria is information in the user profile that determines whether an initial request is sent to a particular AS.
When the AS receives the call initiation request, the AS is able to determine the served user (Bob) and the session case (here "term") from the received P Served User header field content and is able to execute terminating services.
When the CDIV service is executed (as a terminating service of Bob), the AS changes the target (Request URI) of the session (toward Carol's address) and a new call leg is created.
The served user becomes the diverting user.
This new call leg could be considered as an originating call leg from the diverting user (Bob), but this is not the case.
Indeed, the originating user remains the same (Alice), and some of the diverting user's originating services should not be triggered as if it was an originating call.
For instance, the originating user identity (Alice) should not be restricted because the diverting user (Bob) has a privacy service for his own identity.
The privacy of the diverting user should apply to information related to this user only (e.g., in the History Info header field).
In the same manner, some specific services will need to be triggered on the outgoing leg after a CDIV.
Without a dedicated session case for originating after CDIV, the S CSCF cannot trigger an originating service for the diverting user, nor can an AS execute the procedures for this particular session case.
For this use case, this document creates a new parameter ("orig cdiv") for the originating after CDIV session case to be embedded in the P Served User header field.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
The use of the P Served User header field extensions is only applicable inside a Trust Domain [RFC3324] for the P Served User header field.
Nodes in such a Trust Domain explicitly trust each other to convey the served user and to be responsible for withholding that information outside of the Trust Domain.
The means by which the network determines the served user and the policies that are executed for a specific served user is outside the scope of this document.
Proxy Behavior and Parameter Handling
The following section illustrates how this header field parameter can be used in a 3GPP network.
For a terminating call, the following steps will be followed: 1.
The S CSCF receives the initial INVITE request for a terminating call and determines that the session case is for a terminating user as described in [RFC5502].
The S CSCF determines who is the served user by looking at the Request URI and saves the current Request URI.
The S CSCF analyzes the filter criteria.
It then sends the request to the AS of the served user as an INVITE that includes the P Served User header field with the "sescase" parameter set to "term" and the "regstate" set to the corresponding value in order to trigger execution of terminating services.
Based on some criteria, the AS concludes that the request has to be diverted to another target user or application.
The AS replaces the received Request URI with the new diverted to address and stores the successive Request URI(s) values by adding one or two History Info header field entry(ies)
[RFC7044] in the outgoing INVITE.
In the History Info header field, the served user address is tagged by using the mp param header field parameter added in the newly created entry that contains the diverted to address.
The AS forwards the INVITE request back to the S CSCF.
When receiving back the INVITE request, the S CSCF can see that the topmost Route header field contains its own hostname, but the Request URI does not match the saved Request URI.
In this case, the S CSCF updates the P Served User header field content by replacing the "sescase" parameter with the "orig cdiv" parameter.
The P Served User header field value remains unchanged.
The S CSCF forwards the INVITE request to an AS that hosts the served user's (diverting user's) originating services, which need to be executed on the forwarded leg after a CDIV service.
When the AS receives the INVITE request, it determines that the session case is for the "orig cdiv" session case and performs the originating services to be executed after retargeting for the diverting user (i.e., served user).
Clarification of RFC 5502 Procedures
This document provides the following guidance for the handling of the P Served User header field that is missing in [RFC5502]:
The P Served User header field MUST NOT be repeated within a request for a particular session at a particular time for the reason that session cases are mutually exclusive.
to clearly state that the P Served User header field MUST NOT contain multiple values either comma separated or header separated.
This document also updates the syntax of the header from [RFC5502] to reflect this uniqueness of parameter values.
[RFC5502] does not clearly state what to do with the received P Served User header field when a call is diverted to another destination.
This document highlights that there are several ways of handling the P Served User header field: the S CSCF could store the previous "regstate" value and decide that the same value applies, the "regstate" may no longer be relevant after a diverting service so the S CSCF removes it, or the "regstate" could be combined with the "orig cdiv" session case to provide different services depending on whether the served user is registered or unregistered.
These choices are implementation dependent.
General [RFC5502] defines the P Served User header field with the sessioncase param parameter "sescase", which is specified as having "orig" and "term" as predefined values.
This document defines an additional parameter, "orig cdiv", for the sessioncase param.
Because this document extends the existing sessioncase param parameter, and because errors have been identified in the syntax, this document corrects and extends the P Served User header field.
The extension of the sessioncase param parameter to add
the "orig cdiv" session case is done in a way that fits the parameter format introduced in Release 11 of the 3GPP [TS.3GPP.24.229] and maintains backward compatibility.
"EQUAL", "HCOLON", "SEMI", "name addr", "addr spec", and "generic param" are defined in [RFC3261].
If the "addr spec" contains a comma, question mark, or semicolon, the "name addr" form MUST be used.
The "name addr" form requires the use of angle brackets (< and >).
ABNF The Augmented Backus Naur Form (ABNF)
[RFC5234] syntax of the P Served User header field is described in [RFC5502].
to correct the P Served User header field ABNF syntax and extend it as the following:
"P Served User" HCOLON PServedUser value
"orig cdiv" Examples of possible P Served User header fields:
<sip:user@example.com>; orig cdiv; regstate reg or P Served User: <sip:user@example.com>; orig cdiv or P Served User:
<sip:user@example.com>; sescase term; regstate unreg
This document allows choosing between "addr spec" and "name addr" when constructing the header field value.
As specified in RFC 8217, the "addr spec" form MUST NOT be used if its value would contain a comma, semicolon, or question mark [RFC8217].
The following call flow shows a session establishment when Alice calls Bob, who has a CDIV service that diverts to Carol when Bob is busy.
[Alice calls Bob] F1 INVITE Alice
F2 INVITE S CSCF B
> P Served User: <sip:bob@example.com>;
term; regstate reg F3 INVITE AS B
> P Served User: <sip:bob@example.com>;
term; regstate reg F4 INVITE
S CSCF B   Bob INVITE
> P Served User: <sip:bob@example.com>;
His CDIV when busy is invoked towards Carol] F5 F6 486 BUSY
[Alice's call is diverted to Carol] F7 INVITE AS B
> P Served User: <sip:bob@example.com>;
regstate reg [The forwarded leg to Carol is identified as an originating call after CDIV, which should not trigger all of Bob's originating services] F8 INVITE S CSCF B   AS B
> P Served User: <
sip:bob@example.com>; orig cdiv; regstate reg F9 INVITE AS B
> P Served User: <
sip:bob@example.com>; orig cdiv; regstate reg F10 INVITE S CSCF B   Carol
P Served User During CDIV Service 7.2.
The following call flow shows a CDIV use case for which Alice has no identity restriction service and Bob has an unconditional CDIV service towards Carol and an identity presentation restriction service.
[Alice calls Bob] F1 INVITE Alice
histinfo F2 INVITE S CSCF B
> P Served User: <sip:bob@example.com>;
term; regstate reg [Bob's unconditional CDIV to Carol is triggered]
F3 INVITE AS B   S CSCF B INVITE sip:carol@domainc.com
P Served User: <sip:bob@example.com>; term; regstate reg History Info: <sip:
[Alice's call is diverted to Carol] F4 INVITE S CSCF B   AS B INVITE sip:carol@domainc.com
P Served User: <sip:bob@example.com>; orig cdiv; regstate reg History Info: <sip:
bob@example.com>;index 1, <sip:carol@domainc.com;cause 302>;index 1.1;mp 1 F5 INVITE
P Served User: <sip:bob@example.com>; orig cdiv; regstate reg History Info: <sip:bob@example.com?privacy
[Forwarded leg to Carol is identified as an originating call after CDIV that allows Bob's privacy service to be applied to his identity within the History Info header field] F6 INVITE S CSCF B
carol@192.0.2.7>;index 1.1.1;rc 1.1 Figure 2.
The syntax of the P Served User header field [RFC5502] is updated in Section 4 of this document.
IANA has updated the existing row for the P Served User header field in the "Header Fields" subregistry within the "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Parameters" registry:
The security considerations in [RFC5502] apply.
As the "orig cdiv" parameter of the P Served User header field can be used to trigger applications when a call is diverted, it is important to ensure that the parameter has not been added to the SIP message by an unauthorized SIP entity.
Thus, the P Served User header field is to be used in a trusted environment, and proxies MUST NOT insert the header unless they have sufficient knowledge that the route set includes another trusted proxy.
