This document outlines the procedures by which the IETF makes appointments to the Community Coordination Group (CCG), which provides advice and guidance to the IETF Trust in matters related to the IANA trademarks and the IANA domain names.
The "IANA IPR Community Agreement" [1] was one of the many documents that was part of the IANA Stewardship Transition.
It calls for the creation of the Community Coordination Group (CCG) to provide guidance and advice to the IETF Trust regarding the stewardship of the IANA Intellectual Property, which is the IANA trademarks and the IANA domain names.
The CCG is comprised of nine individuals, called the CCG Representatives.
The three operational communities (i.e., the Names Community, the Numbers Community, and the Protocol Parameters Community) each appoint three CCG Representatives.
Each operational community has the right to change any of its CCG Representatives upon written notice to the other operational communities and the IETF Trust.
An operational community may remove or replace its CCG Representatives at any time and at its sole discretion.
The means and procedures by which an operational community chooses to select, appoint, and remove its own CCG Representatives are determined solely by that operational community.
Each operational community appoints one of its CCG Representatives as a co chair of the CCG, and that co chair is empowered to speak on behalf of its operational community regarding the IANA Intellectual Property.
An operational community has the right to change its CCG co chair upon written notice to the other operational communities and the IETF Trust.
An operational community may remove or replace its CCG co chair at any time and at its sole discretion.
This document outlines the procedures for the IETF to select, appoint, and remove the three CCG Representatives for the Protocol Parameter Community.
In addition, this document outlines the procedures for the selection of the co chair among those CCG Representatives.
Desirable Qualifications for CCG Representatives Candidates for the CCG Representative position for the Protocol Parameters Community should have a demonstrable involvement in the IETF and a solid understanding of the various ways that the IETF makes use of protocol parameter registries.
Candidates should be familiar with the ways that the IETF community depends upon the IANA trademarks and the IANA domain names.
Candidates are expected to be able to call on others in the IETF community, as required, to ensure that the IETF Trust receives the highest quality advice available.
Candidates are expected to possess clearly demonstrated technical competence relating to the management of IANA protocol parameter registries.
Candidates are also expected to be able to understand the ways that IANA registries are used by the Names Community and the Numbers Community.
The three CCG Representatives for the Protocol Parameters Community serve at the pleasure of the IAB.
Duration of Appointment Each of the CCG Representatives is expected to serve for at least a year, and appointments ought to be staggered to avoid simultaneous replacement of all of the CCG Representatives at the same time.
Each year the IAB will seek input from the IETF community to determine whether a personnel change is appropriate.
Nominations and Eligibility When the IAB decides to appoint a new person as a CCG Representative, the IAB will make a public call for nominations on the ietf announce@ietf.org mailing list.
The public call will specify the manner by which nominations will be accepted and the means by which the list of nominees will be published for IETF community feedback.
Each nomination must include the name and contact information for each candidate.
The details about the candidate's background and qualifications for the position should be provided with the nomination.
Trustees of the IETF Trust are not eligible for nomination.
All other IETF participants, including working group chairs, IETF NomCom members, IAB members, and IESG members are eligible for nomination.
IAB members who accept a nomination shall recuse themselves from selection discussions.
The IAB will publish the list of people that have accepted their nomination or have nominated themselves.
Feedback from the IETF community will be considered by the IAB in making a selection.
The IAB will keep any received feedback confidential.
The IAB will consider potential conflicts with a CCG Representative position and any other positions held by the nominated candidates.
After considering the IETF community feedback, potential conflicts, and any other appropriate information that is available, the IAB shall vote to select the best qualified CCG Representative.
If there are concerns with the performance of an IAB appointed CCG Representative, the IETF community can request that the IAB consider removal.
Such a request must be sent by email to iab chair@iab.org.
The request must include a statement of justification for the removal of the CCG Representative, including all relevant and appropriate supporting documentation.
The IAB shall respond to the request within six weeks.
If an IAB member is serving in any of the CCG Representative positions, regardless of the operational community that the IAB member represents, that IAB member shall be recused from any investigation, discussion, and vote to determine what action to take.
If the CCG Representative is removed, then the open position is to be filled according to Section 3 of this document.
CCG Representative Co Chair Selection Procedures
Whenever there is a change to the list of people that are serving as CCG Representatives for the Protocol Parameters Community, the sitting CCG Representatives shall use a procedure of their own choosing to select the co chair.
The co chair selection shall be confirmed by the IAB, and then the IAB shall announce the co chair selection to the IETF community, the IETF Trust, and the CCG Representatives from the other operational communities.
At any time, for any reason, the list of people that are serving as CCG Representatives for the Protocol Parameters Community may revisit the selection of co chair.
If a different selection is made, the new selection shall be confirmed by the IAB, and then the IAB shall announce the co chair selection to the IETF community, the IETF Trust, and the CCG Representatives from the other operational communities.
As part of the confirmation process, the IAB shall consider potential conflicts of interest of the candidate for co chair.
Since three CCG Representatives needed to be in place at midnight on 30 September 2016 when the IANA Stewardship Transition took place, the IAB quickly appointed three individuals that were heavily involved in the transition.
The three individuals agreed to serve until the appointment procedures could be adopted and employed.
Using the procedures in this document, the IAB will appoint three CCG Representatives before the second IETF meeting in 2017.
To encourage the staggered replacement, at least one of those appointed will be replaced before the second IETF meeting in 2018, that is, one year after the first set of CCG Representatives are appointed by the process in this document.
Reporting by the CCG Representatives to the IAB
CCG Representatives shall deliver reports to the IAB within a reasonable time frame, providing whenever possible the opportunity to obtain advice regarding open IANA Intellectual Property issues.
While no specific time periods for reporting are mandated, CCG Representatives are expected to keep the IAB informed of CCG activities.
Reports from the CCG Representatives will be made publicly available, except for comments about individuals.
These reports will typically be part of the minutes of the IAB meeting where they are discussed.
This document does not require any IANA actions.
This document does not describe any technical protocols and has no implications for network security.
IAB Members at the Time of Approval
The IAB members at the time this memo was approved were (in alphabetical order):
Ted Hardie Joe Hildebrand Russ Housley Lee Howard Erik Nordmark Robert Sparks
Andrew Sullivan Dave Thaler Martin Thomson Brian Trammell Suzanne Woolf
