the Network with Telnet Protocol.
TSO is not yet considered "production" by CCN, since there are a number of restrictions and glitches to be removed or documented.
However, TSO is now quite stable and is up on a regularly scheduled basis; the system will allow an experienced programmer to work productively at CCN.
To use TSO, you will need a valid CCN charge (billing) number, and a user id.
To obtain a charge number (if you do not already have one), or to obtain a TSO user id, contact Barbara Noble at (213)
At present we are not charging for TSO use (although any batch jobs submitted from TSO will be charged to your account).
Barbara can assign on overhead charge number for experimental use of TSO if you do not have a paid account.
(1)  Conversational Remote Job Entry Using TSO you can prepare an OS job stream using the TSO EDIT command, SUBMIT the job to batch execution, monitor its STATUS, and ship the OUTPUT back to EDIT for examination.
This allows those of you with TIP'S to process jobs at CCN without using NETRJS via a friendly TENEX machine.
Any batch job can be submitted this way.
Many OS/360 programs can be run, with varying degrees of inconvenience, directly from the terminal.
There are TSO commands providing the facilities of EXEC and DD cards; the output stream can be directed to the user's terminal.
There are some important limitations to fore  ground operation, however: (1)
The foreground region size is limited; at present, it is 128K, though this will be expanded.
(3)  Since you are time sliced and swapped, it can be very slow.
There are two important cases of foreground execution: (A)
The TEST command provides DDT like debugging capability for foreground programs.
The user's own program can interact with his terminal.
It is not yet possible for a program, either in batch or foreground, to open direct Network connections.
Hours of Operation   Monday through Friday, 6 A.M. Noon PDT (or 9 A.M. 3 P.M. EDT).
These hours will be extended before September 1, 1972.
VIA ARPA NETWORK VIRTUAL TERMINAL",
RFC #377 describes the use of a Telnet NVT to access TSO.
There are some signi  ficant differences from using a real 2741 locally.
RFC #377 describes the current server Telnet, complete with an annoying bug.
A later version will include the following capabilities not presently available: (a)  "FULL DUPLEX", i.e., CCN echoing.
The special character translation included in NETRJS users with Model 33 Teletypes.
(d)  Optional specification of single CR or single LF as end of line indication (e)
Hopefully, the input attention bug described in RFC #377 will be fixed.
TSO will automatically place datasets created in the foreground (e.g., by EDIT or ALLOC) on the proper resident disk pack.
All TSO datasets are cataloged, and can be referenced by name alone (no volume or unit specifi  cation is necessary).
For most purposes, you can pretend we have one big disk.
The standard IBM version of TSO uses the TSO user id as the highest index of each dataset name.
At CCN, the  two  highest levels are the charge number and the user id of the person who created the dataset.
TSO has been modified accordingly.
In general, under TSO a user can access for reading, writing, or execution any dataset named with the charge number with which he is logged on.
In addition, he can rename or scratch any dataset with the logon charge number.
There is no provision for public or read only datasets a present.
On   Most Network users will need only the simple form of LOGON:
(Use your user id) TSO:
(TSO repeats line for reasons of its own) TSO:
xyz TSO:  UID LOGON IN PROGRESS
1984 TSO:  WELCOME TO TSO.
GOOD LUCK TSO:  READY User
id's are created in TSO with a blank password.
To add or change your password, use the CHANGE command.
If you have TSO access under more than one charge number, LOGON will prompt you for the charge number to be used for the session.
Where to Get Help   1.
To obtain a list of TSO commands enter:  "help commands" 2.
To get detailed information on syntax and function of a particular command, enter: "help <command name>
" Type "help help" for details.
The SEND command may be useful for on line help from PCN (Pete Nielsen) or WDD (Bill Drain), when they are signed on.
You can find out if PCN or WDD is on by sending them a trial message.
USER WDD NOT LOGGED ON
Here "PCN" was logged on and got your message.
You can, therefore, converse with him through SEND.
The text in one SEND is limited to 115 characters.
You can also leave a message for wdd to receive when he logs on by typing:  send '<message>' user(wdd) logon.
You can call the CCN Telephone Consultant at (213)
825 7452, Monday through Friday during the hours 10 12 A.M. PDT and 1 4 P.M. (except 3 4 P.M. on Thursday).
If the consultant does not know the answer,
he/she will investigate and call you back.
You can call the general contact for Network user problems, Barbara Noble, at (213)
Barbara is also one of the Telephone consultants.
If all else fails, call Bill Drain, the CCN Systems Programmer in charge of TSO installation.
) 825 7474 (if no answer, call my secretary at (213)
825 7518 and leave a message for Bill).
You can also send a message to someone at CCN by submitting the following pseudo job through RJS at TSO:
[ direction of Alex McKenzie.
