Abstract Although the use of the SIP (Session Initiation Protocol) Reason header field in responses is considered in general in RFC 3326, its use is not specified for any particular response code.
Nonetheless, existing deployments have been using Reason header fields to carry failure related Q.850 cause codes in SIP responses to INVITE requests that have been gatewayed to Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) systems.
This document normatively describes the use of the Reason header field in carrying Q.850 cause codes in SIP responses.
Although the use of the SIP (Session Initiation Protocol) Reason header field in responses is considered in general in RFC 3326 [RFC3326], its use is not specified for any particular response code.
Nonetheless, existing deployments have been using Reason header fields to carry failure
cause codes in SIP responses to INVITE requests that have been gatewayed to PSTN systems.
This document normatively describes the use of the Reason header field in SIP responses to carry Q.850 [Q.850] cause codes.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
This document uses terms from [RFC3261].
This document allows SIP responses to carry Reason header fields as follows:
Any SIP Response message, with the exception of a 100 (Trying), MAY contain a Reason header field with a Q.850 [Q.850] cause code.
The Reason header field is not needed in the 100 (Trying) responses, since they are transmitted hop by hop, not end to end.
SIP responses with Reason header fields carrying values other than Q.850 [Q.850]
cause codes are outside of the scope of this document.
This specification allows the presence of the Reason header field containing Q.850 [Q.850] cause codes in responses.
The presence of the Reason header field in a response does not affect the treatment of the response.
Nevertheless, there could be situations where a wrong Q.850 [Q.850] cause code could, for example, cause an announcement system to play the wrong information.
To avoid such situations, it is RECOMMENDED that this header field be protected by a suitable integrity mechanism.
The use of transport  or network  layer hop by hop security mechanisms, such as Transport Layer Security (TLS) or IPsec with appropriate cipher suites, can satisfy this requirement.
