1780, 1720, 1610, 1600, 1540, 1500, 1410, 1360, 1280, 1250, 1200, 1140, 1130, 1100, 1083 INTERNET OFFICIAL PROTOCOL STANDARDS Status of this Memo
This memo describes the state of standardization of protocols used in the Internet as determined by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB).
This memo is an Internet Standard.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
Table of Contents Introduction .
The Request for Comments Documents .
Definitions of Protocol State (Maturity Level) .
Definitions of Protocol Status (Requirement Level) .
52 6.10  Obsolete Protocols .
IAB, IETF, and IRTF Contacts .
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)
Request for Comments Editor Contact  .
Network Information Center Contact .
Sources for Requests for Comments  .
59 Introduction A discussion of the standardization process and the RFC document series is presented first, followed by an explanation of the terms.
Sections 6.2 6.10 contain the lists of protocols in each stage of standardization.
Finally are pointers to references and contacts for further information.
This memo is intended to be issued every one hundred RFCs; please be sure the copy you are reading is current.
Current copies may be obtained from the Requests for Comments Editor (RFC EDITOR) or from the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) (see the contact information at the end of this memo).
See Section 6.1 for a description of recent changes.
The Internet Architecture Board maintains this list of documents that define standards for the Internet protocol suite.
See RFC 1601 for the charter of the IAB and RFC 1160 for an explanation of the role and organization of the IAB and its subsidiary groups, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
Each of these groups has a steering group called the IESG and IRSG, respectively.
The IETF develops these standards with the goal of co ordinating the evolution of the Internet protocols; this co ordination has become quite important as the Internet protocols are increasingly in general commercial use.
The definitive description of the Internet standards process is found in RFC 1602.
The majority of Internet protocol development and standardization activity takes place in the working groups of the IETF.
Protocols which are to become standards in the Internet go through a series of states or maturity levels (proposed standard, draft standard, and standard) involving increasing amounts of scrutiny and testing.
When a protocol completes this process it is assigned a STD number (see RFC 1311).
At each step, the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) of the IETF must make a recommendation for advancement of the protocol.
To allow time for the Internet community to consider and react to standardization proposals, a minimum delay of 6 months before a proposed standard can be advanced to a draft standard and 4 months before a draft standard can be promoted to standard.
It is general practice that no proposed standard can be promoted to draft standard without at least two independent implementations (and the recommendation of the IESG).
Promotion from draft standard to standard generally requires operational experience and demonstrated interoperability of two or more implementations (and the recommendation of the IESG).
In cases where there is uncertainty as to the proper decision concerning a protocol a special review committee may be appointed consisting of experts from the IETF, IRTF and the IAB with the purpose of recommending an explicit action.
Advancement of a protocol to proposed standard is an important step since it marks a protocol as a candidate for eventual standardization (it puts the protocol "on the standards track").
Advancement to draft standard is a major step which warns the community that, unless major objections are raised or flaws are discovered, the protocol is likely to be advanced to standard.
Some protocols have been superseded by better ones or are otherwise unused.
Such protocols are still documented in this memorandum with the designation "historic".
Because it is useful to document the results of early protocol research and development work, some of the RFCs document protocols which are still in an experimental condition.
The protocols are designated "experimental" in this memorandum.
They appear in this report as a convenience to the community and not as evidence of their standardization.
Other protocols, such as those developed by other standards organizations, or by particular vendors, may be of interest or may be recommended for use in the Internet.
The specifications of such protocols may be published as RFCs for the convenience of the Internet community.
These protocols are labeled "informational" in this memorandum.
In addition to the working groups of the IETF, protocol development and experimentation may take place as a result of the work of the research groups of the Internet Research Task Force, or the work of other individuals interested in Internet protocol development.
The the documentation of such experimental work in the RFC series is encouraged, but none of this work is considered to be on the track for standardization until the IESG has made a recommendation to advance the protocol to the proposed standard state.
A few protocols have achieved widespread implementation without the approval of the IESG.
For example, some vendor protocols have become very important to the Internet community even though they have not been recommended by the IESG.
However, the IAB strongly recommends that the standards process be used in the evolution of the protocol suite to maximize interoperability (and to prevent incompatible protocol requirements from arising).
The use of the terms "standard", "draft standard", and "proposed standard" are reserved in any RFC or other publication of Internet protocols to only those protocols which the IESG has approved.
In addition to a state (like "Proposed Standard"), a protocol is also assigned a status, or requirement level, in this document.
The possible requirement levels ("Required", "Recommended", "Elective", "Limited Use", and "Not Recommended") are defined in Section 4.2.
When a protocol is on the standards track, that is in the proposed standard, draft standard, or standard state (see Section 5),
the status shown in Section 6 is the current status.
Few protocols are required to be implemented in all systems; this is because there is such a variety of possible systems, for example, gateways, routers, terminal servers, workstations, and multi user hosts.
The requirement level shown in this document is only a one word label, which may not be sufficient to characterize the implementation requirements for a protocol in all situations.
For some protocols, this document contains an additional status paragraph (an applicability statement).
In addition, more detailed status information may be contained in separate requirements documents (see Section 3).
The Request for Comments Documents
The documents called Request for Comments (or RFCs) are the working notes of the "Network Working Group", that is the Internet research and development community.
A document in this series may be on essentially any topic related to computer communication, and may be anything from a meeting report to the specification of a standard.
All standards are published as RFCs, but not all RFCs specify standards.
Anyone can submit a document for publication as an RFC.
Submissions must be made via electronic mail to the RFC Editor (see the contact information at the end of this memo, and see RFC 2223).
While RFCs are not refereed publications, they do receive technical review from the task forces, individual technical experts, or the RFC Editor, as appropriate.
The RFC series comprises a wide range of documents, ranging from informational documents of general interests to specifications of standard Internet protocols.
In cases where submission is intended to document a proposed standard, draft standard, or standard protocol, the RFC Editor will publish the document only with the approval of the IESG.
For documents describing experimental work, the RFC Editor will notify the IESG before publication, allowing for the possibility of review by the relevant IETF working group or IRTF research group and provide those comments to the author.
See Section 5.1 for more detail.
Once a document is assigned an RFC number and published, that RFC is never revised or re issued with the same number.
There is never a question of having the most recent version of a particular RFC.
However, a protocol (such as File Transfer Protocol (FTP)) may be improved and re documented many times in several different RFCs.
It is important to verify that you have the most recent RFC on a particular protocol.
This "Internet Official Protocol Standards" memo is the reference for determining the correct RFC for the current specification of each protocol.
The RFCs are available from the RFC EDITOR, and a number of other sites.
For more information about obtaining RFCs, see Sections 7.4 and 7.5.
There are three other reference documents of interest in checking the current status of protocol specifications and standardization.
These are the Assigned Numbers, the Gateway Requirements, and the Host Requirements.
Note that these documents are revised and updated at different times; in case of differences between these documents, the most recent must prevail.
Also, one should be aware of the MIL STD publications on IP, TCP, Telnet, FTP, and SMTP.
These are described in Section 3.4.
The "Assigned Numbers" document lists the assigned values of the parameters used in the various protocols.
For example, IP protocol codes, TCP port numbers, Telnet Option Codes, ARP hardware types, and Terminal Type names.
Assigned Numbers was most recently issued as RFC 1700.
Requirements for IP Version 4 Routers
This document reviews the specifications that apply to gateways and supplies guidance and clarification for any ambiguities.
Requirements for IP Version 4 Routers is RFC 1812.
This pair of documents reviews and updates the specifications that apply to hosts, and it supplies guidance and clarification for any ambiguities.
Host Requirements was issued as RFC 1122 and RFC 1123.
The DoD MIL STD Internet specifications are out of date and have been discontinued.
The DoD's Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) lists the current set of IETF STDs and RFCs that the DoD intends to use in all new and upgraded Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) acquisitions.
A copy of the JTA can be obtained from http://www jta.itsi.disa.mil. 4.
There are two independent categorization of protocols.
The first is the "maturity level" or STATE of standardization, one of "standard", "draft standard", "proposed standard", "experimental", "informational" or "historic".
The second is the "requirement level" or STATUS of this protocol, one of "required", "recommended", "elective", "limited use", or "not recommended".
The status or requirement level is difficult to portray in a one word label.
These status labels should be considered only as an indication, and a further description, or applicability statement, should be consulted.
When a protocol is advanced to proposed standard or draft standard, it is labeled with a current status.
At any given time a protocol occupies a cell of the following matrix.
Protocols are likely to be in cells in about the following proportions (indicated by the relative number of Xs).
A new protocol is most likely to start in the (proposed standard, elective) cell, or the (experimental, limited use) cell.
S T A T U S Req   Rec   Ele
Some protocols are particular to hosts and some to gateways; a few protocols are used in both.
The definitions of the terms below will refer to a "system" which is either a host or a gateway (or both).
It should be clear from the context of the particular protocol which types of systems are intended.
Every protocol listed in this document is assigned to a "maturity level" or STATE of standardization: "standard", "draft standard", "proposed standard", "experimental", or "historic".
The IESG has established this as an official standard protocol for the Internet.
These protocols are assigned STD numbers (see RFC  1311).
These are separated into two groups: (1) IP protocol and above, protocols that apply to the whole Internet; and (2) network specific protocols, generally specifications of how to do IP on particular types of networks.
The IESG is actively considering this protocol as a possible Standard Protocol.
Substantial and widespread testing and comment are desired.
Comments and test results should be submitted to the IESG.
There is a possibility that changes will be made in a Draft Standard Protocol before it becomes a Standard Protocol.
These are protocol proposals that may be considered by the IESG for standardization in the future.
Implementation and testing by several groups is desirable.
Revision of the protocol specification is likely.
A system should not implement an experimental protocol unless it is participating in the experiment and has coordinated its use of the protocol with the developer of the protocol.
Typically, experimental protocols are those that are developed as part of an ongoing research project not related to an operational service offering.
While they may be proposed as a service protocol at a later stage, and thus become proposed standard, draft standard, and then standard protocols, the designation of a protocol as experimental may sometimes be meant to suggest that the protocol, although perhaps mature, is not intended for operational use.
Informational Protocol Protocols developed by other standard organizations, or vendors, or that are for other reasons outside the purview of the IESG, may be published as RFCs for the convenience of the Internet community as informational protocols.
These are protocols that are unlikely to ever become standards in the Internet either because they have been superseded by later developments or due to lack of interest.
This document lists a "requirement level" or STATUS for each protocol.
The status is one of "required", "recommended", "elective", "limited use", or "not recommended".
A system must implement the required protocols.
Recommended Protocol A system should implement the recommended protocols.
Elective Protocol A system may or may not implement an elective protocol.
The general notion is that if you are going to do something like this, you must do exactly this.
There may be several elective protocols in a general area, for example, there are several electronic mail protocols, and several routing protocols.
These protocols are for use in limited circumstances.
This may be because of their experimental state, specialized nature, limited functionality, or historic state.
These protocols are not recommended for general use.
This may be because of their limited functionality, specialized nature, or experimental or historic state.
The Standards Track This section discusses in more detail the procedures used by the RFC Editor and the IESG in making decisions about the labeling and publishing of protocols as standards.
The RFC Processing Decision Table
Here is the current decision table for processing submissions by the RFC Editor.
The processing depends on who submitted it, and the status they want it to have.
Inform the source of the rules.
RFCs specifying Standard, or Draft Standard must come from the IESG, only.
(3) Refer to an Area Director for review by a WG.
Expect to see the document again only after approval by the IESG.
(4) Notify both the IESG and IRSG.
If no concerns are raised in two weeks then do Discretion (5), else RFC Editor to resolve the concerns or do Refer (3).
The RFC Editor decides if a review is needed and if so by whom.
RFC Editor decides to publish or not.
Of course, in all cases the RFC Editor can request or make minor changes for style, format, and presentation purposes.
The IESG has designated the IESG Secretary as its agent for forwarding documents with IESG approval and for registering concerns in response to notifications (4) to the RFC Editor.
Documents from Area Directors or Working Group Chairs may be considered in the same way as documents from "other".
There is a part of the STATUS and STATE categorization that is called the standards track.
Actually, only the changes of state are significant to the progression along the standards track, though the status assignments may change as well.
The states illustrated by single line boxes are temporary states, those illustrated by double line boxes are long term states.
A protocol will normally be expected to remain in a temporary state for several months (minimum six months for proposed standard, minimum four months for draft standard).
A protocol may be in a long term state for many years.
A protocol may enter the standards track only on the recommendation of the IESG; and may move from one state to another along the track only on the recommendation of the IESG.
That is, it takes action by the IESG to either start a protocol on the track or to move it along.
Generally, as the protocol enters the standards track a decision is made as to the eventual STATUS, requirement level or applicability (elective, recommended, or required)
the protocol will have, although a somewhat less stringent current status may be assigned, and it then is placed in the the proposed standard STATE with that status.
So the initial placement of a protocol is into state 1.
At any time the STATUS decision may be revisited.
The transition from proposed standard (1) to draft standard (2) can only be by action of the IESG and only after the protocol has been proposed standard (1) for at least six months.
The transition from draft standard (2) to standard (3) can only be by action of the IESG and only after the protocol has been draft standard (2) for at least four months.
Occasionally, the decision may be that the protocol is not ready for standardization and will be assigned to the experimental state (4).
This is off the standards track, and the protocol may be resubmitted to enter the standards track after further work.
There are other paths into the experimental and historic states that do not involve IESG action.
Sometimes one protocol is replaced by another and thus becomes historic, or it may happen that a protocol on the standards track is in a sense overtaken by another protocol (or other events) and becomes historic (state 5).
The Protocols Subsection 6.1 lists recent RFCs and other changes.
Subsections 6.2 6.10 list the standards in groups by protocol state.
A Convention For Using Legal Names as Domain Names
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Mapping of Airline Reservation, Ticketing, and Messaging Traffic over IP
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Timeout Interval and Transfer Size Options A Draft Standard protocol.
TFTP Blocksize Option A Draft Standard protocol.
2347 TFTP Option Extension A Draft Standard protocol.
Making Postscript and PDF International
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Domain Names and Company Name Retrieval An Experimental protocol.
Reverse Tunneling for Mobile IP A Proposed Standard protocol.
2343 RTP Payload Format for Bundled MPEG An Experimental protocol.
Namespace A Proposed Standard protocol.
Cisco Layer Two Forwarding (Protocol) "L2F" A Historic protocol.
An Agreement Between the Internet Society, the IETF, and Sun Microsystems,
Inc.  in the matter of NFS V.4 Protocols
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2338 Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol A Proposed Standard protocol.
Intra LIS IP multicast among routers over ATM using Sparse Mode PIM An Experimental protocol.
A Distributed NHRP Service Using SCSP A Proposed Standard protocol.
Server Cache Synchronization Protocol (SCSP)
2333 NHRP Protocol Applicability Statement A Proposed Standard protocol.
Next Hop Resolution Protocol (NHRP)
2331 ATM Signalling Support for IP over ATM UNI Signalling 4.0 Update A Proposed Standard protocol.
2330 Framework for IP Performance Metrics
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2328 OSPF Version 2 A Standard protocol.
2327 SDP: Session Description Protocol A Proposed Standard protocol.
2326 Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP)
2325 Definitions of Managed Objects for Drip Type Heated Beverage Hardware Devices using SMIv2
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Hyper Text Coffee Pot Control Protocol (HTCPCP/1.0)
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
IETF Identification and Security Guidelines
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2322 Management of IP numbers by peg dhcp
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
The Reliable Internetwork Troubleshooting Agent
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2320 Definitions of Managed Objects for Classical IP and ARP Over ATM
Ukrainian Character Set KOI8 U
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is a Best Current Practices document and does not specify any level of standard.
2316 Report of the IAB Security Architecture Workshop
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Cryptographic Message Syntax Version 1.5
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
: Certification Request Syntax Version 1.5
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
S/MIME Version 2 Message Specification
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
The Safe Response Header Field An Experimental protocol.
2309 Recommendations on Queue Management and Congestion Avoidance in the Internet
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Negative Caching of DNS Queries (DNS NCACHE)
An Approach for Using LDAP as a Network Information Service An Experimental protocol.
2306 Tag Image File Format (TIFF)
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
A Simple Mode of Facsimile Using Internet Mail A Proposed Standard protocol.
2304 Minimal FAX address format in Internet Mail
Minimal PSTN address format in Internet Mail
2302 Tag Image File Format (TIFF)
image/tiff MIME Sub type Registration A Proposed Standard protocol.
File Format for Internet Fax A Proposed Standard protocol.
An Extensible Message Format for Message Disposition Notifications A Proposed Standard protocol.
Ipsilon's General Switch Management Protocol Specification Version 2.0
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
HTTP Remote Variant Selection Algorithm
Transparent Content Negotiation in HTTP An Experimental protocol.
Representing the O/R Address hierarchy in the X.500 Directory Information Tree A Proposed Standard protocol.
Representing Tables and Subtrees in the X.500 Directory A Proposed Standard protocol.
2292 Advanced Sockets API for IPv6
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2291 Requirements for a Distributed Authoring and Versioning Protocol for the World Wide Web
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Mobile IPv4 Configuration Option for PPP IPCP A Proposed Standard protocol.
A One Time Password System A Draft Standard protocol.
Using Existing Bibliographic Identifiers as Uniform Resource Names
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2287 Definitions of System Level Managed Objects for Applications A Proposed Standard protocol.
Test Cases for HMAC RIPEMD160 and HMAC RIPEMD128
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Benchmarking Terminology for LAN Switching Devices
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
PPP Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)
Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP 4 A Proposed Standard protocol.
2282 IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall Committees
This is a Best Current Practices document and does not specify any level of standard.
2281 Cisco Hot Standby Router Protocol (HSRP)
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Routing Policy Specification Language (RPSL)
UTF 8, a transformation format of ISO 10646 A Proposed Standard protocol.
2278 IANA Charset Registration Procedures
This is a Best Current Practices document and does not specify any level of standard.
IETF Policy on Character Sets and Languages
This is a Best Current Practices document and does not specify any level of standard.
Architectural Principles of Uniform Resource Name Resolution
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
View based Access Control Model (VACM) for the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
User based Security Model (USM) for version 3 of the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv3)
Applications A Proposed Standard protocol.
2272 Message Processing and Dispatching for the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
An Architecture for Describing SNMP Management Frameworks A Proposed Standard protocol.
Using a Dedicated AS for Sites
Homed to a Single Provider
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Using the MARS Model in non ATM NBMA Networks
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
A Description of the RC2(r)
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source Address Spoofing This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2266 Definitions of Managed Objects for IEEE 802.12 Repeater Devices A Proposed Standard protocol.
2265 View based Access Control Model (VACM) for the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
User based Security Model (USM) for version 3 of the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv3)
Applications A Proposed Standard protocol.
2262 Message Processing and Dispatching for the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
An Architecture for Describing SNMP Management Frameworks A Proposed Standard protocol.
2260 Scalable Support for Multi homed Multi provider Connectivity
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Simple Nomenclator Query Protocol (SNQP)
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
A Summary of the X.500(96)
User Schema for use with LDAPv3 A Proposed Standard protocol.
The LDAP URL Format A Proposed Standard protocol.
The String Representation of LDAP Search Filters A Proposed Standard protocol.
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (v3): UTF 8 String Representation of Distinguished Names A Proposed Standard protocol.
2252 Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (v3): Attribute Syntax Definitions A Proposed Standard protocol.
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (v3)
2250 RTP Payload Format for MPEG1/MPEG2 Video A Proposed Standard protocol.
Mail Monitoring MIB A Proposed Standard protocol.
Network Services Monitoring MIB A Proposed Standard protocol.
2247 Using Domains in LDAP/X.500 Distinguished Names
Anonymous SASL Mechanism A Proposed Standard protocol.
2244 ACAP   Application Configuration Access Protocol A Proposed Standard protocol.
OTP Extended Responses A Proposed Standard protocol.
NetWare/IP Domain Name and Information A Proposed Standard protocol.
2241 DHCP Options for Novell Directory Services A Proposed Standard protocol. 2240
A Legal Basis for Domain Name Allocation
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2239 Definitions of Managed Objects for IEEE 802.3 Medium Attachment Units (MAUs) using SMIv2 A Proposed Standard protocol.
2238 Definitions of Managed Objects for HPR using SMIv2 A Proposed Standard protocol.
2237 Japanese Character Encoding for Internet Messages
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2236 Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 2
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications: ABNF A Proposed Standard protocol.
The Interfaces Group MIB using SMIv2 A Proposed Standard protocol.
2232 Definitions of Managed Objects for DLUR using SMIv2 A Proposed Standard protocol.
2231 MIME Parameter Value and Encoded Word Extensions:
Character Sets, Languages, and Continuations A Proposed Standard protocol.
Key Exchange Delegation Record for the DNS
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2227 Simple Hit Metering and Usage Limiting for HTTP A Proposed Standard protocol.
IP Broadcast over ATM Networks A Proposed Standard protocol.
Classical IP and ARP over ATM A Proposed Standard protocol.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2223 Instructions to RFC Authors
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2222 Simple Authentication and Security Layer (SASL)
Login Referrals A Proposed Standard protocol.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2219 Use of DNS Aliases for Network Services
This is a Best Current Practices document and does not specify any level of standard.
A Common Schema for the Internet White Pages Service A Proposed Standard protocol.
Telnet Com Port Control Option An Experimental protocol.
Network Element Service Specification Template
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2215 General Characterization Parameters for Integrated Service Network Elements A Proposed Standard protocol.
Integrated Services Management Information Base Guaranteed Service Extensions using SMIv2 A Proposed Standard protocol. 2213
Integrated Services Management Information Base using SMIv2 A Proposed Standard protocol.
2212 Specification of Guaranteed Quality of Service A Proposed Standard protocol.
2211 Specification of the Controlled Load Network Element Service A Proposed Standard protocol.
The Use of RSVP with IETF Integrated Services A Proposed Standard protocol.
Version 1 Message Processing Rules A Proposed Standard protocol.
Some Guidelines on Deployment A Proposed Standard protocol.
2207 RSVP Extensions for IPSEC Data Flows A Proposed Standard protocol.
2206 RSVP Management Information Base using SMIv2 A Proposed Standard protocol. 2205
Version 1 Functional Specification A Proposed Standard protocol.
2204 ODETTE File Transfer Protocol
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
RPCSEC GSS Protocol Specification A Proposed Standard protocol.
2202 Test Cases for HMAC MD5 and HMAC SHA 1
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Core Based Trees (CBT) Multicast Routing Architecture An Experimental protocol.
2200 Internet Official Protocol Standards A Standard protocol.
Request for Comments Summary RFC Numbers 2100 2199
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2198 RTP Payload for Redundant Audio Data A Proposed Standard protocol.
2197 SMTP Service Extension for Command Pipelining A Draft Standard protocol.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
IMAP/POP AUTHorize Extension for Simple Challenge/Response A Proposed Standard protocol.
2194 Review of Roaming Implementations
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
IMAP4 Mailbox Referrals A Proposed Standard protocol.
2192 IMAP URL Scheme A Proposed Standard protocol.
VENUS Very Extensive Non Unicast Service
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
RTP Payload Format for H.263 Video Streams A Proposed Standard protocol.
Core Based Trees (CBT version 2)
Multicast Routing An Experimental protocol.
AT&T/Neda's Efficient Short Remote Operations (ESRO)
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2187 Application of Internet Cache Protocol (ICP), version 2
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Internet Cache Protocol (ICP), version 2
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Routing Aspects of IPv6 Transition
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
MIME Parameter Value and Encoded Word Extensions:
Character Sets, Languages, and Continuations A Proposed Standard protocol.
Communicating Presentation Information in Internet Messages: The Content Disposition Header Field A Proposed Standard protocol.
2182 Selection and Operation of Secondary DNS Servers
This is a Best Current Practices document and does not specify any level of standard.
2181 Clarifications to the DNS Specification A Proposed Standard protocol.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Network Security For Trade Shows
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
IDLE command A Proposed Standard protocol.
2176 IPv4 over MAPOS Version 1
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2175 MAPOS 16 Multiple Access Protocol over SONET/SDH with
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
A MAPOS version 1 Extension Switch Switch Protocol
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
A MAPOS version 1 Extension Node Switch Protocol
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
MAPOS Multiple Access Protocol over SONET/SDH Version 1
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Application REQuested IP over ATM
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
A Trivial Convention for using HTTP in URN Resolution An Experimental protocol.
2168 Resolution of Uniform Resource Identifiers using the Domain Name System An Experimental protocol.
V1.5 This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
APPN Implementer's Workshop Closed Pages Document DLSw v2.0 Enhancements
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Service Location Protocol A Proposed Standard protocol.
2164 Use of an X.500/LDAP directory to support MIXER address mapping A Proposed Standard protocol.
Using the Internet DNS to Distribute MIXER Conformant Global Address Mapping (MCGAM)
Mapping between X.400 / Internet mail and Mail 11 mail
A MIME Body Part for ODA An Experimental protocol.
2160 Carrying PostScript in X.400 and MIME A Proposed Standard protocol.
A MIME Body Part for FAX A Proposed Standard protocol.
2158 X.400 Image Body Parts A Proposed Standard protocol.
Mapping between X.400 and RFC 822
/MIME Message Bodies A Proposed Standard protocol.
2156 MIXER (Mime Internet X.400 Enhanced Relay):
Mapping between X.400 and RFC 822
/MIME A Proposed Standard protocol.
2155 Definitions of Managed Objects for APPN using SMIv2 A Proposed Standard protocol.
2154 OSPF with Digital Signature An Experimental protocol.
A Primer On Internet and TCP/IP Tools and Utilities
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2150 Humanities and Arts: Sharing Center Stage on the Internet
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
2148 Deployment of the Internet White Pages Service
This is a Best Current Practices document and does not specify any level of standard.
2115 Management Information Base for Frame Relay DTEs
Using SMIv2 A Draft Standard protocol.
2094 Group Key Management Protocol (GKMP) Architecture An Experimental protocol.
2093 Group Key Management Protocol (GKMP) Specification An Experimental protocol.
The following are changes to protocols listed in the previous edition.
2349 TFTP Timeout Interval and Transfer Size Options Elevated to Draft Standard.
2348 TFTP Blocksize Option Elevated to Draft Standard.
2347 TFTP Option Extension Elevated to Draft Standard.
A One Time Password System Elevated to Draft Standard.
2197 SMTP Service Extension for Command Pipelining Elevated to Draft Standard.
2115 Management Information Base for Frame Relay DTEs
SMIv2 Elevated to Draft Standard.
17 NETBIOS    NetBIOS Service Protocols
Quote of the Day Protocol
51 PPP HDLC   PPP in HDLC Framing
IP Datagrams over the SMDS Service
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
The Internet Architecture Board intends to move towards general adoption of IP multicasting, as a more efficient solution than broadcasting for many applications.
The host interface has been standardized in RFC 1112; however, multicast routing gateways are in the experimental stage and are not widely available.
An Internet host should support all of RFC 1112, except for the IGMP protocol itself which is optional; see RFC 1122 for more details.
Even without IGMP, implementation of RFC 1112 will provide an important advance: IP layer access to local network multicast addressing.
It is expected that IGMP will become recommended for all hosts and gateways at some future date.
The Internet Architecture Board recommends that all IP and TCP implementations be network manageable.
At the current time, this implies implementation of the Internet MIB II (RFC 1213), and at least the recommended management protocol SNMP (RFC 1157).
The Routing Information Protocol (RIP) is widely implemented and used in the Internet.
However, both implementors and users should be aware that RIP has some serious technical limitations as a routing protocol.
The IETF is currently devpeloping several candidates for a new standard "open" routing protocol with better properties than RIP.
The IAB urges the Internet community to track these developments, and to implement the new protocol when it is standardized; improved Internet service will result for many users.
As OSI protocols become more widely implemented and used, there will be an increasing need to support interoperation with the TCP/IP protocols.
The Internet Engineering Task Force is formulating strategies for interoperation.
RFC 1006 provides one interoperation mode, in which TCP/IP is used to emulate TP0 in order to support OSI applications.
Hosts that wish to run OSI connection oriented applications in this mode should use the procedure described in RFC  1006.
In the future, the IAB expects that a major portion of the Internet will support both TCP/IP and OSI (inter )network protocols in parallel, and it will then be possible to run OSI applications across the Internet using full OSI protocol "stacks".
OSPF   RFC 1370 is an applicability statement for OSPF.
All Network Specific Standards have Elective status.
1490 ATM ENCAP  Multiprotocol Encapsulation over ATM
IP Multicast over Token Ring LANs
Prop   1469 IP FDDI    Transmission of IP and ARP over FDDI
Internet Protocol on IEEE 802
46 IP SLIP    Transmission of IP over Serial Lines
Std    1132    49 IP HIPPI
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
Applicability Statements: It is expected that a system will support one or more physical networks and for each physical network supported the appropriate protocols from the above list must be supported.
That is, it is elective to support any particular type of physical network, and for the physical networks actually supported it is required that they be supported exactly according to the protocols in the above list.
See also the Host and Gateway Requirements RFCs for more specific information on network specific ("link layer") protocols.
TFTP Blk   TFTP Blocksize Option
MIME MEDIA MIME Media Types
PPP CHAP   PPP Challenge Handshake
1989 COEX MIB   Coexistence between SNMPV1 & SNMPV2
CON MD5    Content MD5 Header Field
BGP 4 MIB  BGP 4 MIB
SMTP Service Ext or 8bit MIMEtransport
ISO TS ECHO Echo for ISO 8473
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
Applicability Statements: PPP   Point to Point Protocol is a method of sending IP over serial lines, which are a type of physical network.
It is anticipated that PPP will be advanced to the network specifics standard protocol state in the future.
NHRP APP   NHRP Protocol Applicability Statement
MIB   Classical IP and ARP Over ATM MIB
Simple Mode of FAX Using
MINFAX IM  Minimal FAX addr format in
PSTN addr format in Internet Mail
EMF MDN    Extensible Message Format for MDN
Config Opt for PPP IPCP
PPP EAP    PPP Extensible Authentication Protocol
VACM SNMP  View based Access Control Model for SMMP
MPD SNMP   Message Processing & Dispatching SNMP
LDAP URL   LDAP URL Format
String Rep of LDAP Search Filters
RTP Payload Format for MPEG1/MPEG2
DHCP NDS   DHCP Options for Novell Directory Serv.
Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications
MIB   Definitions of Managed Objects for DLUR
Schema for Internet White Pages
RSVP IS    Use of RSVP with IETF Integrated Serv
MPR   RSVP Messaging Processing Rules
RSVP IPSEC RSVP Extensions for IPSEC Data Flows
MIB   RSVP Management Information Base
The Content Disposition Header Field
Clarifications to the DNS Specification  Elective
Using DNS to Distribute MCGAM
MIB   Definitions of Managed Objects for APPN
IPv6 Jumbo TCP and UDP over IPv6 Jumbograms
DNS UPDATE Dynamic Updates in the DNS
HMAC MD5   HMAC MD5 IP Auth.
2037 RTP JPEG   RTP Payload Format for JPEG compressed
RTP Payload Format of Sun's
Simple Public Key GSS API Mechanism
2011 MOBILEIPMIBMobile IP MIB Definition using SMIv2
IPENCAPIP  IP Encapsulation within IP
for Notification of Zone Changes
1968 GSSAPI KER Kerberos Version 5 GSS API Mechanism
GSSAPI SOC GSS API Auth for SOCKS Version 5
TRANS IPV6 Transition Mechanisms IPv6 Hosts/Routers
Username Authentication for SOCKS V5
Remote Procedure Call Protocol V. 2
OSPF to Support Demand Circuits
PPP XNS IDP Control Protocol
SSR  802.5 SSR MIB using
POP3 AUTH  POP3 AUTHentication command
MIB  Modem MIB using SMIv2
ATM Management Version 8.0 using
SNANAU MIB SNA NAUs MIB using
Extensions to RIP to Support Demand Cir.
X500 MIB   X.500 Directory Monitoring
MIB   FDDI Management Information Base
KERBEROS   Kerberos Network Authentication Ser (V5)
SNMP MIB Extension for X.25 Packet Layer
SNMP MIB Extension for X.25 LAPB
SNMP PARTY MIB Administration of SNMP
X.400 1988 to 1984 downgrading
Border Gateway Protocol MIB (Version 3)
STD MIBs   Reassignment of Exp MIBs to Std
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
Ele/Req indicates elective for use with IPv4 and required for use with IPv6.]
, all the Telnet Options are collected here with both their state and status.
Remote Controlled Trans and Echo    7
Output Carriage Return Disposition 10
Output Vertical Tab Disposition    15
727 TOPT BYTE  Byte Macro
Prop  Ele    1041 TOPT X.3
Prop  Ele    1073 TOPT TS
TOPT ENVIR Telnet Environment Option
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
All Experimental protocols have the Limited Use status.
Intra LIS IP Multicast/Routers over ATM using
Using LDAP as a Network Information Service    2307  HTTP RVSA
HTTP Remote Variant Selection Algorithm
Core Based Trees (CBT version 2)
Traffic Flow Measurement Meter MIB
Enhanced Trivial File Transfer Protocol
Large and Binary MIME Msgs.
Schema Publishing in X.500 Directory
TCP/IPXMIB TCP/IPX Connection Mib Specification
Host Group Extensions for CLNP Multicasting
TCP HIPER  TCP Extensions for High Performance
Digest Message Format for Mail
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
Informational Protocols Information protocols have no status.
SMIME CERT S/MIME Version 2 Certificate
A Description of the RC2(r)
AT&T/Neda's Efficient Short Remote Operations Protocol
PPP IPCP Extensions for Name Server Addresses
1706 RADIO PAGE TPC.INT Subdomain:
OSI HYPER  OSI and LLC1 on HYPERchannel
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
All Historic protocols have Not Recommended status.
802.4 MIP  IEEE 802.4 Token Bus MIB
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
Some of the protocols listed in this memo are described in RFCs that are obsoleted by newer RFCs.
"Obsolete" or "obsoleted" is not an official state or status of protocols.
This subsection is for information only.
While it may seem to be obviously wrong to have an obsoleted RFC in the list of standards, there may be cases when an older standard is in the process of being replaced.
This process may take a year or two.
Many obsoleted protocols are of little interest and are dropped from this memo altogether.
Some obsoleted protocols have received enough recognition that it seems appropriate to list them under their current status and with the following reference to their current replacement.
[Note: an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
IAB, IETF, and IRTF Contacts 7.1.1.
Contact Please send your comments about this list of protocols and especially about the Draft Standard Protocols to the Internet Architecture Board care of Abel Winerib, IAB Executive Director.
Abel Winerib Executive Director of the IAB Intel, JF2 64 2111 NE 25th Avenue Hillsboro,
OR 97124 1 503 696 8972
Brian E. Carpenter Chair of the IAB IBM United Kingdon Laboratories
Hursley Park Winchester Hampshire SO21 2JN
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
Fred Baker Chair of the IETF cisco Systems,
Inc. 519 Lado Drive Santa Barbara, CA 93111 1 805 681 0115 fred@cisco.com
Steve Coya IESG Secretary Corporation for National Research Initiatives 1895
Preston White Drive, Suite 100 Reston, VA 22091 1
703 620 8990 scoya@IETF.ORG Steve Coya Executive Director of the IETF Corporation for National Research Initiatives 1895
Preston White Drive, Suite 100 Reston, VA 22091 1
703 620 8990 scoya@IETF.ORG 7.1.3.
Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)
Abel Winerib Chair of the IRTF Intel, JF2 64 2111 NE 25th Avenue Hillsboro, OR 97124 1 503 696 8972 AWinerib@ibeam.jf.intel.com 7.2.
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority Contact Contact:
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority USC/Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA  90292 6695 1
The protocol standards are managed by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority.
Please refer to the document "Assigned Numbers" (RFC 1700) for further information about the status of protocol documents.
There are two documents that summarize the requirements for host and gateways in the Internet, "Host Requirements" (RFC 1122 and RFC 1123) and "Requirements for IP Version 4 Routers" (RFC 1812).
How to obtain the most recent edition of this "Internet Official Protocol Standards" memo: The file "in notes/std/std1.txt" may be copied via FTP from the FTP.ISI.EDU computer using the FTP username "anonymous" and FTP password "guest".
Request for Comments Editor Contact Contact:
Jon Postel RFC Editor USC/Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA  90292 6695 1
310 822 1511 RFC Editor@ISI.EDU Documents may be submitted via electronic mail to the RFC Editor for consideration for publication as RFC.
If you are not familiar with the format or style requirements please request the "Instructions for RFC Authors".
In general, the style of any recent RFC may be used as a guide.
The Network Information Center and Requests for Comments Distribution Contact RFCs can be obtained via FTP from FTP.ISI.EDU, with the pathname in  notes/rfcnnnn.txt (where "nnnn" refers to the number of the RFC).
Login with FTP username "anonymous" and password "name@host.domain".
RFCs can also be obtained via electronic mail from ISI.EDU by using the RFC INFO service.
Address the request to "rfc info@isi.edu" with a message body of:
RFC Doc ID: RFCnnnn (Where "nnnn" refers to the number of the RFC (always use 4 digits the DOC ID of RFC 822
The RFC INFO@ISI.EDU server provides other ways of selecting RFCs based on keywords and such; for more information send a message to "rfc info@isi.edu" with the message body "help: help".
Sources for Requests for Comments Details on many sources of RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending an EMAIL message to "rfc info@ISI.EDU" with the message body "help: ways to get rfcs".
For example: To: rfc info@ISI.EDU Subject: getting rfcs help: ways to get rfcs 8.  Security Considerations Security issues are not addressed in this memo.
Author's Address Jon Postel USC/Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
310 823 6714 EMail: Postel@ISI.EDU
Full Copyright Statement Copyright (C)
This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works.
However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than English.
The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS
ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
