Abstract This document defines and registers a value of "impp" ("instant messaging and presence protocol") for the "purpose" header field parameter of the Call Info header field in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).
Some real time communication endpoints support the combined use of the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
[RFC3261] and the Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP)
To improve interoperability among such "CUSAX" endpoints [CUSAX], it can be helpful to advertise each endpoint's SIP address over XMPP and each endpoint's XMPP address over SIP, thus providing hints about the communication capabilities of the endpoints.
The former feature is enabled by an XMPP extension protocol called Reachability Addresses [XEP 0152].
As to the latter feature, discussion in the SIP community led to the conclusion that it would be best to use the Call Info header field [RFC3261] with a value of "impp" ("instant messaging and presence protocol") for the "purpose" header field parameter.
Although CUSAX endpoints constitute the primary use case for the "impp" purpose, a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)
[RFC3986] for an instant messaging and presence protocol other than XMPP could be included in the Call Info header field.
an endpoint's XMPP address over SIP could inform malicious entities about an alternative attack vector.
Because the "purpose" header field parameter could be spoofed, the receiving endpoint ought to check the value against an authoritative source such as a user directory.
Clients can integrity protect and encrypt this header field using end to end mechanisms such as S/MIME or hop  by hop mechanisms such as Transport Layer Security (TLS).
This specification provides a new way to correlate otherwise possibly unconnected identifiers.
Because such correlations can be privacy sensitive, user agents ought to provide a means for users to control whether or not these values are sent.
This document defines and registers a new predefined value "impp" for the "purpose" header field parameter of the Call Info header field.
The IANA has completed this action by adding this RFC as a reference to the line for the header field "Call Info" and parameter name "purpose" in the "Header Field Parameters and Parameter Values" section of the "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Parameters" registry as follows:
Call Info Parameter Name: purpose
