Abstract RFC 2754 requested that each time IANA made an address assignment, it was to create appropriate inetnum and as block objects and digitally sign them.
The purpose was to distribute the IANA held public key in software implementations of the Distributed Routing Policy System.
In practice, this was never done on the public Internet.
This document requests that RFC 2754 be moved to Historic status.
The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) (www.iana.org) is charged with allocating parameter values for fields in protocols that have been designed, created, or are maintained by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
[RFC2754] requests that the IANA create a repository of Routing Policy Specification Language (RPSL) objects and digitally sign them.
The RFC identifies the initial objects to be signed and also requests that each time IANA makes an address assignment it also create new objects as needed and sign them as well.
In practice, this was never done in the public Internet.
During a detailed review of IANA's protocol registration activities in support of the IETF, this request for IANA action was identified as one of those that had not been completed after publication of the RFC.
This document obsoletes RFC 2754
[RFC2754], recommends that it be moved to Historic status, and directs IANA not to move forward with the IANA actions in that RFC. 2.
[RFC2754] requests that the IANA create a repository of RPSL objects and digitally sign them.
The RFC identifies the initial objects to be signed and also requests that each time IANA makes an address assignment it also create new objects as needed and sign them as well.
During a review of RFCs in 2009, it became apparent that the IANA actions requested in RFC 2754 were never done.
In the intervening time, another technology appears to be taking the role once envisioned for Distributed RPSL.
Both an architecture and infrastructure now exist for secure routing using Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) technologies.
As an example, the semantics of a Route Origin Authorization (ROA)   an application of the RPKI   to validate the origination of routes has been standardized by the IETF.
Implementation of the IANA actions in RFC 2754 would now require significant implementation complexity.
In the face of alternative technology, and given that the requested actions have not been implemented in the public Internet, it is proposed to reclassify RFC 2754
[RFC2754] as Historic and to direct the IANA not to pursue or implement the IANA requests in that document.
The word "allocation" designates a block of addresses managed by a registry for the purpose of making assignments and allocations.
The word "assignment" designates a block of addresses, or a single address, registered to an end user for use on a specific network, or set of networks.
IANA Considerations IANA is instructed not to pursue or implement the IANA actions requested in RFC 2754 [RFC2754].
The intended signature of inetnum and as block objects never took place in the public Internet.
[RFC2754] to Historic status would have no known impact on the security of the Internet.
