Abstract This document provides specific direction to IANA as to the Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) objects it should issue.
"An Infrastructure to Support Secure Internet Routing" [RFC6480] directs IANA [RFC2860] to issue Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) objects for which it is authoritative.
This document describes the objects IANA will issue.
If IANA is directed to issue additional RPKI objects in future, this document will be revised and a new version issued.
The signed objects described here that IANA will issue are the unallocated, reserved, special use IPv4 and IPv6 address blocks, and the unallocated and reserved Autonomous System numbers.
These number resources are managed by IANA for the IETF; thus, IANA bears the responsibility of issuing the corresponding RPKI objects.
The reader is encouraged to consider the technical effects on the public routing system of the signed object issuance proposed for IANA in this document.
This document does not deal with BGP [RFC4271] routing systems, as those are under the policy controls of the organizations that operate them.
Readers are directed to "Local Trust Anchor Management for the Resource Public Key Infrastructure" [TA MGMT] for a description of how to locally override IANA issued objects, e.g., to enable use of unallocated, reserved, and special use IPv4 and IPv6 address blocks in a local context.
The direction to IANA contained herein follows the ideal that it should represent the ideal technical behavior for registry and related registry actions.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Required Reading Readers should be familiar with the RPKI, the RPKI repository structure, and the various RPKI objects, uses, and interpretations described in the following:
[RFC6480], [RFC6487], [RFC6482], [RFC6493], [TA MGMT], [RFC6483], [RPKI USE], [RFC6484], and [RFC6486].
The addresses used in this document are not example addresses; therefore, they are not compliant with [RFC3849], [RFC5735], and [RFC5771].
This is intentional, as the practices described in this document are directed to specific instances of real world addresses.
Definitions Internet Number Resources (INR):
The number identifiers for IPv4 [RFC0791] and IPv6 [RFC2460] addresses, and for Autonomous Systems (ASes).
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (a traditional name, used here to refer to the technical team making and publishing the assignments of Internet protocol technical parameters).
The technical team of IANA is currently a part of ICANN [RFC2860].
A Public Key Infrastructure designed to provide a secure basis for assertions about holdings of Internet number resources.
Certificates issued under the RPKI contain additional attributes that identify IPv4, IPv6, and Autonomous System number resources [RFC6480].
A ROA is an RPKI object that enables the holder of the address prefix to specify an AS that is permitted to originate (in BGP) routes for that prefix [RFC6482].
A ROA containing a value of 0 in the ASID field.
"Validation of Route Origination Using the Resource Certificate Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and Route Origination Authorizations (ROAs)"
[RFC6483] states "A ROA with a subject of AS 0 (AS 0 ROA) is an attestation by the holder of a prefix that the prefix described in the ROA, and any more specific prefix, should not be used in a routing context."
"Not intended to be (publicly) routed": This phrase refers to prefixes that are not meant to be represented in the global Internet routing table (for example 192.168/16 [RFC1918]).
IPv4 and IPv6 resources are held back for various reasons by IETF action.
Generally, such resources are not intended to be globally routed.
An example of such a reservation is 127.0.0.0/8 [RFC5735].
See Appendixes A and B for IANA reserved resources.
IANA SHOULD issue an AS 0 ROA for all reserved IPv4 and IPv6 resources not intended to be routed.
The selection of the [RFC2119] terminology is intentional as there may be situations where the AS 0 ROA is removed or not issued prior to an IANA registry action.
It is not appropriate to place IANA into a situation where, through normal internal operations, its behavior contradicts IETF standards.
There are a small number of reserved resources that are intended to be routed, for example 192.88.99.0/24
See Appendixes A and B for IANA reserved resources.
IANA MUST NOT issue any ROAs (AS 0 or otherwise) for reserved resources that are expected to be globally routed.
Unallocated Resources Internet Number Resources that have not yet been allocated for special purposes [RFC5736], to Regional Internet Registries (RIRs), or to others are considered as not intended to be globally routed.
IANA SHOULD issue an AS 0 ROA for all Unallocated Resources.
The selection of the [RFC2119] terminology is intentional as there may be situations where the AS 0 ROA is removed or not issued prior to an IANA registry action.
It is not appropriate to place IANA into a situation where, through normal internal operations, its behavior contradicts IETF standards.
Special Purpose Registry Resources Special Registry Resources [RFC5736] fall into one of two categories in terms of routing.
Either the resource is intended to be seen in the global Internet routing table in some fashion, or it isn't.
An example of a Special Registry Resources INR that is intended for global routing is 2001::/32 [RFC4380].
An example of an INR not intended to be seen would be 2001:002::/48 [RFC5180].
IANA MUST NOT issue any ROAs (AS 0 or otherwise) for Special Purpose Registry Resources that are intended to be globally routed.
IANA SHOULD issue an AS 0 ROA for Special Purpose Registry Resources that are not intended to be globally routed.
Multicast Within the IPv4 multicast [RFC5771] and IPv6 multicast [RFC4291]
registries there are a number of Multicast registrations that are not intended to be globally routed.
IANA MUST issue an AS 0 ROA covering the following IPv4 and IPv6 multicast INRs:
IANA Reserved portions of RESERVED 224.1.0.0 224.1.255.255 (224.1/16)
RESERVED 224.5.0.0 224.251.255.255 (251 /16s)
Node Local Scope Multicast Addresses Link Local Scope
IANA MUST NOT issue any ROAs (AS 0 or otherwise) for any other multicast addresses
unless directed by an IESG approved Standards Track document with an appropriate IANA Considerations section.
One informational object that can exist at a publication point of an RPKI repository is the Ghostbusters Record [RFC6493].
IANA MUST issue a ghostbusters object appropriate in content for the resources IANA maintains.
Certificates and Certificate Revocation Lists (CRLs)
Before IANA can issue a ROA, it MUST first establish an RPKI Certification Authority (CA) that covers unallocated, reserved, and special use INRs.
A CA that covers these INRs MUST contain RFC 3379 extensions [RFC3779] for those corresponding number resources in its certificate.
This CA MUST issue single use end entity (EE) certificates for each ROA that it generates.
The EE certificate will conform to the Resource Certificate Profile [RFC6487] and the additional constraints specified in [RFC6482].
IANA MUST maintain a publication point for this CA's use and MUST publish manifests [
RFC6486] (with its corresponding EE certificate) for this publication point.
IANA MUST issue a CRL under this CA certificate for the EE certificates noted above.
All objects issued by this CA will conform to the RPKI Certificate Policy [RFC6484].
This document directs IANA to issue, or refrain from issuing, the specific RPKI objects described here for the current set of reserved, unallocated, and special registry Internet Number Resources.
Further, IANA MUST notify all other INR registries that RPKI objects have been issued for the Internet Number Resources described in this document to avoid the potential for issuance of duplicate objects that might confuse relying parties.
This document does not alter the security profile of the RPKI from that already discussed in SIDR WG documents.
Appendix A.  IANA Reserved IPv4 Address Blocks
This list of Address Space and RFCs was correct at the time of writing this document.
To Be Routed, the intention of the RFC pertaining to the address block.
Table 1: IPv4 Address Blocks and the RFCs that
to Reserve Them Appendix B.  IANA Reserved IPv6 Address Blocks
This list of Address Space and RFCs was correct at the time of writing this document.
To Be Routed, the intention of the RFC pertaining to the address block.
Table 2: IPv6 Address Blocks and the RFCs that Direct IANA to Reserve Them
