IAB and IESG Recommendation for IETF Administrative Restructuring Status of This Memo
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
This document describes a joint recommendation of the Internet Architecture Board and the Internet Engineering Steering Group for administrative restructuring of the Internet Engineering Task Force.
The IETF Chair declared that the IETF had consensus to follow this recommendation on November 11, 2004.
Further work has been done to revise and refine the structures proposed.
The recommendation is being published for the record.
The Process That Produced This Recommendation  .
Focusing on Scenarios C and O  .
Why We Chose Scenario O  .
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) has a need for administrative support functions.
The debate and dialogue of 2003 and 2004 has led to the belief that the way these functions are provided needs to be changed.
This document gives the recommendation of the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) and Internet Architecture Board (IAB) on what the next step in that change process should be, and some of the background and reasoning behind this recommendation.
The Process That Produced This Recommendation During several months in 2004, the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) and the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) worked together to consider several different options for restructuring the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) administrative functions.
The goal of this effort was to produce a recommendation for consideration by and approval of the IETF community.
The rationale for this effort is described in RFC 3716 [1].
Much background work and several detailed proposals for community consideration are provided in a report prepared by a consultant titled "IETF Administrative Support Functions" [2].
The consultant's report included several possible scenarios for administrative restructuring (named scenario A, B, C, and D).
As discussion took place within the IETF community, it became clear that some of the scenarios had features that appeared more promising than others, but that we did not have enough of a concrete proposal to crystallize opinions into a consensus for action.
Members of the IESG and IAB took on the task of working out more complete descriptions of two of the scenarios.
Scenario C (section 4.4 of the report) describes when "administrative support functions for the IETF are legally housed in a focused, incorporated institution" with close ties to the Internet Society (ISOC).
Scenario C is included here as the first appendix.
A new scenario, called Scenario O, that includes features derived from scenarios A and B (sections 4.2 and 4.3 of the report), focusing on the formalization of the ISOC/IETF relationship while housing administrative support functions for the IETF within ISOC.
Scenario O is included here as the second appendix.
These descriptions were not intended to close off discussion of other scenarios, but to focus discussion on what appeared to be two independent loci of support.
Both scenarios were presented to the IETF community as mail notes (Scenario C [3], Scenario O [4]) sent to the IETF discussion list.
IETF participants' opinions, while quite divided on the subject, seemed to indicate a preference for Scenario O as a "lower risk operation", but some participants indicated that they felt unable to give an informed opinion, disagreed with the process, or declared the subject out of their field of competence.
This discussion garnered perhaps 40 participants who contributed on the list.
The IETF Chair then requested an informal poll of IETF opinion.
People interested in participating in the poll were directed to a web site where their opinions could be noted, including whether they wanted to state an opinion or not.
The raw poll results [5] were also shared with the community via a mail note to the IETF discussion list.
The poll sparked additional discussion on the list, and not all participants agreed with the methodology of the poll.
Taken with the discussion, though, the IESG and IAB members believe that there is a stronger indication of community support for change based on Scenario O than on other scenarios.
The IESG and IAB members believe that Scenario O can be a workable basis for further progress, even if it is not the first preference for all members.
Taken together, this has led to the IESG/IAB recommendation given below.
The collective recommendation of the IAB and IESG was presented to the IETF community of Friday 8 October 2004 via a mail note [6] sent to the IETF mailing list: "IETF folks, The IESG and IAB have been considering the input from the IETF community on the next steps going forward in IETF administrative restructuring.
It appears clear to us that the community mostly sees scenario O as the lower risk scenario, and the one that gives us the greatest probability of successfully doing what we have to do.
Based on this, the IESG and the IAB make the following recommendation: We recommend that the IETF pursue scenario O, with the understanding that further work is needed to define the roles and responsibilities of the IETF, the IAOC and the ISOC BoT under this scenario.
The "BCP section" of the scenario
O note will be pulled out and published as an internet draft.
We'd like to put this description to the IETF community for a formal Last Call before the November IETF meeting, if possible.
Also, as noted in the recommendation above, there are a number of points where we need to work out in more detail how the system is going to work who takes decisions, who accepts those decisions, and what conflict resolution mechanisms may be necessary, and so on.
The IAB and IESG are drafting a document that will describe the finer level of detail as to the respective roles and responsibilities of each of the players.
We will publish this as an internet draft shortly.
We will continue to work intensely on this!"
Arguments That Had Particular Weight in the Discussions 4.1.
Focusing on Scenarios C and O The IETF list was presented with four scenarios in the consultant report [2], which should be read for the full context.
In slogan form, they might be rendered as  A: Leave it to ISOC.
Increase IETF control of ISOC, and use ISOC to do it.
Isolate the functions, let ISOC gather money, share control.
: Cut the IETF off from ISOC and do it ourselves.
On the list, there seemed to be very few who were comfortable with the idea that "we" (for some version of "we") could "do it ourselves" as envisioned in Scenario D.
There was also considerable worry about the risk associated with Scenario C, especially with regard to financial stability, and that the perceived danger of problems would cause sponsors to withhold funding, thus precipitating problems even if there was no other reason for them.
Scenario C spoke strongly to those who worried about a possible conflict of interest between ISOC and the IETF community at some future date
"we don't know what ISOC will turn into" was the capsule summary.
Scenario A worried people because it did not seem to acknowledge the IETF community's ability to determine if its needs were being met and what could be done if they were not.
The phrase "replace existing problematic structures by ISOC" was perhaps a capsule summary.
However, Scenario B's list of possible mechanisms for involving IETF community directly in ISOC's operations was not viewed as acceptable or in balance with the full scope of ISOC's activities.
Members of the IAB & IESG developed Scenario O, a solution scenario that put the administrative activity within ISOC, but aimed to provide a means for the IETF to provide oversight and control of that specific activity within ISOC.
Its name is derived from the classification of blood types
Thus, the decision to focus on C and O as "alternatives to be worked out in detail" was made.
Why We Chose Scenario O Capsule summary: It might be possible to make either scenario work.
But Scenario O could be made to work faster, and less painfully.
The ISOC Board of Trustees was significantly worried that scenario C would make fundraising more difficult, which would necessarily affect its ability to support the IETF.
The question of tax status for the new corporation was debated at some length on the list; legal counsel indicated that a corporation that did the IETF work (Scenario D) would probably be easy to get classified as 501(c)(3) (a type of non profit corporation defined by U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations).
However, a corporation that did only administrative support functions, as scenario C envisioned, would have more problems.
In all cases, the process of determining this would take months, and could be dragged out longer if we were unlucky.
The community feedback, in addition to contributing many well formed and well argued points to the discussion, gave a powerful indication on where it was possible to get IETF consensus:
It seemed possible to garner IETF consensus around Scenario O; the people arguing for Scenario C indicated that they "could live with" the alternative.
It seemed much more difficult to garner IETF consensus around Scenario C; many people arguing against it indicated that they were firmly convinced that it was the wrong choice for the IETF.
The IETF is based on the idea that the consensus process, when it works, comes up with reasonable decisions.
We concluded that the apparent drift of community consensus was a reasonable basis for the IESG/IAB recommendations.
This document does not require any IANA actions.
However, the IETF administrative restructuring process is likely to affect how the relationship between the IETF and the IANA is managed.
This document does not introduce any security considerations for the operation of the Internet.
However, administrative restructuring introduces several areas of risk to the future of the IETF.
The risks and their mitigation strategies are described in the scenarios as appended to this document.
Acknowledgements This document is a collective work of the members of the IAB and the IESG.
Members of the IAB at the time of this writing include Bernard Aboba, Harald Alvestrand, Rob Austein, Leslie Daigle, Patrik Faltstrom, Sally Floyd, Mark Handley, Bob Hinden, Geoff Huston, Jun  ichiro Itojun Hagano, Eric Rescorla, Pete Resnick, and Jonathan Rosenberg.
Members of the IESG at the time of this writing include Harald Alvestrand, Steve Bellovin, Bill Fenner, Ted Hardie, Scott Hollenbeck, Russ Housley, David Kessens, Allison Mankin, Thomas Narten, Jon Peterson, Margaret Wasserman, Bert Wijnen, and Alex Zinin.
The administrative restructuring effort cannot succeed without community support and participation.
Thus, the IAB and IESG wish to acknowledge the collective contributions of members of the IETF community who have participated in the discussion of this topic.
This Appendix reproduces the contents of an Internet Draft defining Scenario C, as it was posted on 20 September 2004.
A table of contents has been removed from this copy and the text has been reformatted to fit within IETF publication guidelines.
Each line is prefixed with "C>>".
An IETF Administrative Support Foundation as C>
an Independent Nonprofit Corporation C>
This document defines a proposal for an IETF Administrative C>
Support Foundation (IASF) as an independent not for
It proposes the creation of an IASF Board C>
that is mainly selected by and accountable to C>
the current relationships between IETF and ISOC will C>
In order to allow the community to properly evaluate this C>
for the IASF are included.
Some draft BCP wording for the IASF, C>>
IETF and ISOC relationships is also included.
Overview of Scenario C C>
This document follows from two previous documents.
This document picks one strategy and develops it
In order to provide the most focused and effective administrative C>
, this updated scenario C proposes a C>
new and well defined legal entity to support
The name of that new entity is "The C>
IETF Administrative Support Foundation" (IASF).
such represents the "Standards and Protocols" pillar of ISOC.
Under this proposal, the IETF would continue to be an integral C>
part of the Standards and Protocols pillar of ISOC.
ISOC plays a fundamental role in C
the IETF Standards Process, including appointment of the C>
Nominating Committee (Nomcom) chair, confirmation of IAB C>
These Standards Process Functions are C>
defined in [RFC2026], [RFC2028], [RFC2031], and [RFC3677].
ISOC provides the fund raising C
ISOC provides administrative and C
Editor, providing insurance for selected IETF participants, C>
The administrative restructuring of the IETF proposed in this C>
Specifically, the recommendation does not propose any changes to C>
Under the "Administration Functions", ISOC both funds and C>
administers some (as stated above) parts of the IETF C>
Some of the funds (like for C>
The streamlining of the administrative C>
This means that we recommend that ultimately, ISOC funds C>
The details of that process will be C>
documented in a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between ISOC, C>
This updated AdminRest Scenario C aims to provide the following: C>
A continued close relationship between IETF and ISOC.
A well defined legal entity within which the IETF can define C
the administrative activity in terms of IETF community needs.
A Board of Trustees with operational oversight
accountable to the IETF community.
Continued separation between the IETF standards activity and C>
any fund raising for standards work.
A close and well defined relationship between IASF and ISOC, C>
Appropriate ISOC oversight of its standards activities funds
via a yearly budget approval and open reporting of funds C>
In scenario C, it is intended that the IETF Administrative C>
Support Foundation will be a tax exempt not for profit C
These will describe the scope and purpose of the IASF C>
and they also define the structure and responsibility of the C>
Board of Trustees (BoT), a body that is mainly selected by the C
which is responsible for overseeing the IASF.
next sections of this document.
they meet the community's needs, and adjusting them from time to C
Scenario C also encourages us (the IETF) to regularly evaluate C>
that we do want to continue the relationships with ISOC and the C
on the premise that we prefer to actively maintain relationships C>
with other organizations and service providers instead of being C>
bound to such relationships based on poorly defined and poorly C>
A draft BCP for the relationship
is included as a separate section in C>
Scenario C does however bring the burden of creating a new legal C>
entity (IASF) and such an undertaking is also not without risks.
It will need careful planning and execution.
more costly and time and labour consuming.
try to show how that would be achieved and outlines
Work Plan for the IETF Administrative Support Foundation C>
This section gives the work plan for the IETF Administrative C>
Support Foundation (IASF) for the remainder of 2004 and the year
The work plan below is intended to satisfy three goals: C>
Satisfy the IETF's need for support functions in 2005
Operate with a positive account balance throughout 2005 C>
Start building up a fund inside the IASF to serve as a buffer
against budgetary emergencies in later years (
with a severe cost overrun, or force majeure cancellations).
The fund target is 6 months of operating revenue, and the target C
for building up the fund is 3 years.
The budgeted set aside for C>
the fund should thus be approximately 17% of operating revenue.
There are 3 things that need to be in place before that C>
IETF consensus on the plan C>
ISOC agreement on a reasonable support contract C>
Assurance that the corporation will have tax exempt status C
Once this document has been discussed in the IETF, and the IESG C>
leadership will take the following actions: C>
Choose a negotiating team to negotiate the ISOC contract.
Choose an executive search team to find the IASF C>
Consult with legal counsel to determine how best to achieve C>
When the Last Call is over, the IESG will consider whether there C>
As soon as negotiations conclude, publish a Last Call on the C>
As soon as drafting of legal documents is completed, publish a C>
Last Call on the Bylaws and Articles of Incorporation, and ask C>
the Nomcom to start the process of selecting Nomcom selected C>
These Last Calls are "speak now" Last Calls if someone wishes C
When these Last Calls are over, the IETF chair, the IAB chair and C>
: This document does not say when a Request for Information C>
(RFI) for IETF support services such as meeting planning is sent C>
Advice is sought on the earliest point where this can be C>
The most important activity for late 2004/early 2005 is to C>
arranged for other consideration, should be under contract.
The contract for funding is expected to be with ISOC, and should C>
be finalized before IASF is established.
The contract for technical infrastructure is expected to be an C>
services rendered from a mutually C
agreed date early in 2005.
The contract for meeting management will be influenced by the C>
This indicates that IASF will honor a pre IASF agreement C>
It is not clear how the contract for the clerk's office is to be C>
managed at the time of this writing.
The contract for the RFC Editor is expected to be with ISI, and C>
ISOC, which runs until the end of 2005.
The contract with IANA will replace or augment the current MoU C>
In its simplest form, it would C>
This is an ongoing activity.
In June 2005, the IASF will start the yearly budgeting process C>
with ISOC, as specified in the ISOC contract, leading to a work
The IASF will present monthly updates on its economic status.
These will be delivered to ISOC as part of the ISOC contract, and C>
Details of the IETF Administrative Support Foundation C>
This section contains details about the proposal to change how C>
the day to day IETF administrative support functions are C>
It is further based on discussion in the IESG and IAB C>
Further justifications, reasoning and motivations
This document recommends to create a well defined and legal C>
The name intends to clearly express that this new legal C>
This entity will ultimately manage and C>
3.1  Organizational Form and Legal Domicile C
The consultant report [I D.malamud consultant report] contains a C
This recommendation has made the choice to C>
incorporate in the US in the state of Virginia.
be found in Appendix B. C>
In this scenario, administrative support functions for the IETF C>
This scenario defines a number of concrete linkages with the C
Principles of Establishment and Governance C>
The following principles are to be respected for the C>
Incorporation as in Section 6.1 and the Draft Bylaws as in C>>
The IASF shall be governed by a Board of Trustees (BoT),
The governance of the IETF, the standards process, and all C>
other aspects of how we make our standards are defined in the C>
(BCP) RFC series, which will C>
be explicitly referenced in the organization documents of the C>
The IASF shall be transparent and responsible to the IETF.
The BoT shall appoint a Secretary and a Treasurer, who need C>
The IETF Administrative Director C>
(IAD) of the IASF shall provide staff support to the BoT. C
The BoT shall be composed to strike a balance between C>
The IESG and IAB will each C>
select a representative to serve as a voting member of the C
BoT. Mechanisms such as the Nominating Committee (Nomcom) and C>
the appointment of certain seats by the ISOC fulfill the C
IAB, IESG and ISOC will have liaisons to the BoT in order to C>
have a good basis for interaction.
, the ISOC and Nomcom appointments ensure that outside C>
All nominating bodies should make strong fiscal, legal, and
IAB and IESG representatives will serve for one year.
three years with staggered appointments.
All members of the BoT selected by the IETF are subject to the C
members of the IAB and IESG.
Principles of Operation of the IETF Administrative Support C>
The following are general principles for the operation of the C>
The IASF shall employ an IETF Administrative Director (IAD) C
All support services shall be contracted in an open and C>
The IAD shall submit a proposed annual budget to the BoT at C>
least 90 days before the beginning of the fiscal year.
budget shall be developed with the advice and consent of the C>
The BoT shall select a professional audit firm and shall C>
commission an audit immediately upon the close of each fiscal C
The IASF will conduct financial reporting in a fully C>
Audits shall be conducted promptly and C>
Tax returns shall be published.
Draft MoU between ISOC, IETF and IETF Administrative Support C>
4.1  Form and Scope of the Agreement C>
IETF Administrative Support Foundation (IASF), detailing the work C>
each is expected to perform, the responsibilities each has, and C>
the means by which these functions are accomplished.
MoU/Contract shall be published as an RFC.
The MoU/Contract will specify the responsibilities of the C>
Reaffirmation of the Standards Process Function that ISOC C>
Raising Function that ISOC conducts, C>
in which a single, unified campaign is used to solicit C>
Verification that IASF spends these funds to support the work
Determine, in cooperation with the IETF, the support functions C>
that are needed for the IETF, and can be achieved within C
Enter into contracts for these support functions.
Supervise these contracts and ensure that they are being C
performed in the best interest of the IETF, within a C
IASF and ISOC agree that they will perform a budgeting procedure C>
IASF puts together a budget proposal to ISOC, and presents it
This will specify the functions that need to be C>
performed, the cost of each, the expected revenue from IETF C>
By the end of August, ISOC will give a budget number to IASF C>
that says how much ISOC is willing to contribute to support C
the functions described in the IASF budget.
Before November 1, ISOC and IASF will agree on a budget, an C>
ISOC may withhold funds if IASF fails to account for its C>
significantly from its budgeted expenditures without agreement C>
Promises Not to Do Things C
This section lays out things that would constitute interference C>
In legal terms, these are called "covenants."
ISOC will not place requirements on how IASF does business, C>
It will, for instance, not attempt to C>
influence IASF choice of contractors or choice of meeting
This restriction is meant to enforce the separation C>
IASF will not ask companies for money.
IASF may ask for sponsors C>
but ISOC is the organization
Neither ISOC nor IASF will attempt to influence technical C>
decisions of the IETF standards process.
As part of the formation process, this section sets out a C>
This section is a GUESS!
Its purpose is to give some sense of where we're at.
If this plan is pursued, one of the first activities is to put C>
a detailed 2005 budget, including an analysis of cash C>
properly funded and will be solvent throughout the year.
An initial estimate is for an on going annual contribution of USD C>
900.000 to IASF in 2005.
In addition, ISOC will contribute an C>
as an initial fund to start up IASF, C>
payable after the Board of Trustees is seated and this contract C>
ISOC commits to this ongoing level of contribution
Termination, law and so on C>
This agreement may be terminated by either party for any reason C>
All conflicts under this agreement are to be adjudicated under C
the laws of the United States and the State of Virginia, however C>
This is where we put down why things are the way they are.
5.1  Type of legal instrument C>
An alternate formulation would C>
be a Memorandum of Understanding but we want it to be clear to C>
everyone that the parties stand behind their responsibilities
At the moment, the authors see no C>
compelling arguments for not making it a contract.
> 5.2  Power Balance C
As written, it is designed to make it easy to do the right thing
as long as the parties agree what that is, to make it clear that C>
ISOC will continue to pay money as long as IASF does the Right C>
Thing (and reports what it's doing), and that ISOC can stop the C>
show quickly if it's clear that IASF is not doing the Right C>
The main purpose of the numbers is to make it clear that there
WILL be numbers in this contract, and that it WILL represent a C
The numbers are "subject to change C>
without notice" while this contract is negotiated.
Draft Incorporating Documents for the IETF Administrative C>
Draft Articles of Incorporation C>
They are included here merely as a sample for C>
'Commonwealth of Virginia   State Corporation Commission'  C>
The undersigned, pursuant to Chapter 10 of Title 13.1 of the Code C>
, [Virginia] state(s) as follows:
The name of the corporation is The IETF Administrative C>
The corporation shall have no members.
The purpose of the corporation is to manage and administer C
all the administrative functions for the IETF
Standardization and Protocol Development activity of the C>
The Trustees of the corporation shall be elected or appointed C>
(Section 6.2.5) of the Bylaws.
The name of the corporation's initial registered agent C>
The initial registered agent is a domestic or foreign C>
registered limited liability partnership authorized to C>
The initial Trustees are: XXX C
The incorporators are: XXX C>
6.2  Draft Bylaws of the IETF Administrative Support Foundation C>
As with the Draft Articles, the Draft Bylaws included here are a C>
Substantial alteration may be C>
The name of the Corporation shall be The IETF Administrative C>
Support Foundation (which is hereinafter also referred to as the C>
The IASF shall be operated exclusively for C>
No part of the net earnings of the C>
IASF shall inure to the benefit of, or be distributable to,
IASF shall not carry on any activities not permitted to be C
carried on by a corporation exempt from Federal Income Tax under C
Section 501(a) and Section 501(c)(3) of the Code.
The IASF shall have no members and no stockholders.
6.2.4  Article IV: Offices C>
The office of the IASF shall be as determined from time to time C>
Article V: Board of Trustees C>
Section 1: Authority and Responsibilities.
the authority of the Board of Trustees (BoT) subject to any C
Section 2: Board of Trustees Composition.
The Board of Trustees C>
(1) Trustee will be selected by the IAB.
(1) Trustee will be selected by the IESG.
(2) Trustees will be selected by the Internet Society.
Trustees will be selected by the IETF community.
The IAB chair and IETF chair will functions as liaisons from the C>
president of the Internet Society will function as liaisons C>
from the ISOC to the Board of Trustees.
The term of office of IESG and IAB Selected C>
Trustees shall be one (1) year or
until their successors have C>
been selected and assume office.
The term of office of otherwise C>
Selected Trustees shall be three (3) years or until their C>
Trustees may be selected to serve multiple terms.
Selection of the Board of Trustee  C>
Selection of IESG and IAB Selected Trustees.
IAB shall each select one representative Trustee, who is not C>
at the same time an IESG or IAB member.
Selection of otherwise Selected Trustees.
Selected Trustees shall be selected by the IETF nominations C>
Two ISOC Selected Trustees shall be C>
selected by the Internet Society using means of their own C>
A Selected Trustee may resign by delivering C>
his resignation in writing to the IASF at its principal C>
shall be effective upon its receipt or upon such date
A Selected Trustee selected by the IETF C>
using the procedures specified in [RFC3777] or its successor.
A Selected Trustee selected by the Internet Society may be C>
removed by the Internet Society using means of their own C>
Any vacancy in the Board of Trustees shall be C>
filled using the procedures set forth above on the C>
existence of one or more vacancies in their number.
A majority (i.e.  fifty (50) percent plus C>
one (1)) of the Trustees shall constitute a quorum for the C
Unless otherwise stated in these C>
Bylaws, decisions of the Board of Trustees shall be made by the C>
If at any meeting there is no quorum
present, the Board must not transact business.
Section 6: Compensation and Reimbursement.
No member of the C>
Board of Trustees may receive compensation for his or her C>
A Trustee shall, at their request, be C>
The Board of Trustees shall meet at least C>
Wherever the text below C>
it is also permitted to use e mail.
The Board of Trustees shall hold a public C>
This Annual meeting shall be open to C>
all IETF attendees except that the parts of the meeting C>
Meeting Types, Methods, and Notice.
Meetings of the Board C>
Meetings of the Board C>
all regular meetings of the Board shall be delivered to each C>
Trustee by e mail or by postal mail and announced on the C>
calendar days before the C>
Special meetings of the Board may be called for any C>
purpose at any time by the Chairman of the Board or by any C
Notice of any special meeting shall state C
the purpose of the meeting.
A Trustee may waive notice of a C>
written waiver of notice, either before or after the meeting.
A Trustee's attendance at or participation in a meeting
waives any required notice of the meeting unless at the start C>
promptly upon arrival the Trustee objects C
to holding the meeting or transacting business at the C>
Actions Taken By the Board of Trustees Without Meeting.
the Board of Trustees may be taken without a meeting if all C>
Trustees consent in writing to such action.
a meeting, signed by each Trustee.
The Trustees may elect or appoint C>
Committees shall conduct their affairs in the same C>
members of any committee shall remain in office at the pleasure C>
Trustee Member Conflict of Interest.
As set forth in Section 9(3)
below, a Trustee of the IETF C>
Administrative Support Foundation (IASF) who has a personal C>
participate in any discussion of that transaction by the C>
Trustees of The IASF and may not vote to determine whether to C>
benefit individually to the Trustee, or to a company he or C
she is employed by, has a significant financial interest in, C>
It is expected that most policy C>
A "transaction" with The IASF for purposes of these C>
Bylaws is a contract or consultancy in which the Trustee has C>
a direct or indirect financial benefit, or a policy under C>
on a business with which the Trustee is directly or C>
The mere existence of a personal interest by a Trustee of The C>
IASF in a transaction with the IASF shall not invalidate the C
IASF's ability to enter that transaction so long as the C>
following conditions are met: (i)
the material facts of the C>
personal nature of the transaction with The IASF and the C>
Trustee's interest in the transaction with the IASF are fully C
disclosed to the Board of Trustees of the IASF, either by the C>
Trustee having a direct or indirect personal interest in the C>
by a third party; or (ii)
the BoT of the IASF, by a C
disclosed to the BoT of The IASF and was determined by the C
BoT of the IASF entitled to vote on the matter is determined C
by the BoT voting to be in the IASF's interests, C>
notwithstanding the personal interest of the non voting C
In determining whether a conflict of interest exists, the BoT C>
Any Trustee who perceives a possible conflict of C>
interest may present justification with respect to whether or C>
not a conflict of interest exists, but the entire Board, with C>
the exception of the Trustee having the potential conflict of C>
If the BoT finds there is a conflict of C>
, the Trustee with the conflict may be excluded by C>
a transaction is made, except that he or she may provide any C>
before leaving such a meeting.
Minutes of the BoT of C>
the IASF must be approved by a procedure adopted by the board and C>
published on the IASF web site.
The officers of the IASF shall consist of a C>
other inferior officers as the BoT may determine.
Election Term of Office and Qualifications.
officers shall be elected annually by the vote of a majority of C>
The Treasurer and Secretary need not be C>
The Chair of the IETF nor the chair of the C>
IAB shall be the Chairman of the Board of the IASF.
An officer may resign by delivering his C>
written resignation to the IASF at its principal office or to the C>
Trustees then in office, at a meeting of the BoT called for that C>
An officer may be removed for cause only if notice of C>>
such action shall have been given to all of the Trustees prior to C>
the meeting at which such action is to be taken and
In case any elected officer position of C>
the IASF becomes vacant, the majority of the Trustees in office, C>
elected shall hold office and serve until the next Annual C>
Section 6: Chairman of the Board.
The Chairman of the Board C>
shall, when present, preside at all meetings of the BoT of the C>
another Trustee to preside at that meeting only.
The Treasurer shall have the custody of C>
all funds, property, and securities of the IASF, subject to such C>
she may be required to give bond for the faithful performance of C>
his or her duties, in such sum and with such sureties as the BoT C>
necessary or proper, he or she may endorse on behalf of the IASF C>
for collection, checks, notes and other obligations, and shall
deposit same to the credit of the IASF at such bank or banks or C>
He or she shall make or C>
cause to be made such payments as may be necessary or proper to C
He or she shall enter or cause to C>
reasonable times to any Trustee on application at the offices of C>
Certain duties of the Treasurer as may be C>
specified by the BoT may be delegated by the Treasurer.
and shall have custody of the corporate seal.
The Secretary may sign, with the Chairman, in the name C>>
and on behalf of the IASF, any contracts or agreements, and he or C
she may affix the corporate seal of the IASF.
He or she, in C>
general, performs all the duties incident to the Office of C>
Secretary, subject to the supervision and control of the Board of C>
Trustees, and shall do and perform such other duties as may be C>
assigned to him or her by the BoT or the Chairman of the BoT. C>
Certain duties of the Secretary as may be specified by the BoT C>
Section 9: Other Powers and Duties.
Each officer shall have in C>
addition to the duties and powers specifically set forth in these C
By Laws, such duties and powers as are customarily incident to C>
his office, and such duties and powers as the Trustees may from C
By Laws may be amended by an C>
affirmative vote of a majority of the Trustees then in office C
(excluding abstentions) at a regular meeting of the board or a C>
proposed changes are made available to all trustees and posted to C>
the IETF Announce list at least 30 days before any such meeting.
Section 2: Articles of Incorporation.
Incorporation of the IASF may be amended by an affirmative vote C>
then in office at a regular meeting of C>
the board or a meeting of the board called for that purpose as C>
long as the proposed changes are made available to all trustees C>
and posted to the IETF Announce list at least 30 days before any C>
Upon the dissolution of the IASF, the IASF, after paying or C
making provisions for the payment of all of the liabilities of C>
Any such assets not so disposed C>
of shall be disposed of by a court of competent jurisdiction of C>
then located, exclusively for such purposes.
In the event of a C>
distributable to, its Trustees, officers, or other private C>
Section 2: Execution of Instruments.
All checks, deeds, leases, C>
authorized to be executed by an officer of the IASF in its behalf C>
A certificate by the C>
Secretary as to any action taken by the BoT
shall as to all C
Any determination that any provision C>
By Laws is for any reason inapplicable, illegal or C>
ineffective shall not affect or invalidate any other provision of C>
Section 4: Articles of Incorporation.
All references in these C>
By Laws to the Articles of Incorporation shall be deemed to refer C>
Whenever used herein, the singular number C>
shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, C>>
and the use of any gender shall include all genders.
All references herein: (1) to C>
the Internal Revenue Code shall be deemed to refer to the C>
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now in force or hereafter C
(2) to the Code of the State of Virginia, or any Chapter C>
thereof, shall be deemed to refer to such Code or Chapter as now C>
amended; (3) the particular sections of the C>
Internal Revenue Code or such Code shall be deemed to refer to C>
similar or successor provisions hereafter adopted; and (4) to the C>
Request for Comment Series shall be deemed to refer to the C>
Request for Comment Series as they are now in force or hereafter C
Acknowledgment of Contributions and Reviews C>
A lot of text was taken from the report from Carl Malamud.
Further review was done by various IESG and IAB members.
Malamud also reviewed this document and helped with making the C>
text better English and easier to read.
This documents requires no action from IANA.
This document describes a scenario for the structure of the C>
security considerations for the Internet.
The Internet Standards Process   C>
Revision 3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.
Hovey, R. and S. Bradner, "
[RFC3677]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board,
Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and C>
Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall C>
[Virginia] State of Virginia, "Title 13.1: Corporations, Limited C>
[I D.ietf xmpp core] Saint Andre, P., "Extensible Messaging and C>
(work in progress), May 2004.
[I D.malamud consultant report] Malamud, C., "IETF Administrative C>
(work in progress), September 2004.
EMail: harald at alvestrand.no C
San Diego, CA 92121 1714
EMail: presnick at qualcomm.com C
Appendix A.  Justification, Reasoning and Motivations C
Quite a bit of the proposals from the consultant report have been C>
A.1  Changes to the name of the administrative entity C
In order to make it very clear that the new and legal C
administrative entity is separate from the ISOC IETF activity C>
that deals with standardization and protocol development, this C>
"The IETF Administrative Support Foundation" C>
as the name for the corporation to be created.
Various questions have been raised if the choice of Domicile C>
In order to make progress this C>
based not for profit corporation in the state of Virginia.
Further investigation would most probably delay the whole process C>
by at least half a year.
A.3  Changes to the composition of the BoT C
The consultant report had a proposal for Position based Trustees, C>
which would automatically make the IAB chair and the IETF chair C>
voting members of the Board of Trustees (BoT) of the IETF C>
There was discussion on the C>
We do not want to change those criteria.
that this might generate a conflict of interest as well.
Instead of making IAB and IESG chairs voting Trustees, this C>
The selection of three (3)
Trustees has not changed C
Appendix B.  Domicile of the IETF Administrative Support Foundation C>
non profit, non member corporation is being recommended.
least risky (in the short term).
The reasoning is as follows:
Administrative support for the IETF is currently enmeshed in a C>
in the institutional status of administrative support C>
Incorporation in another country would require familiarity C
with those laws as well.
Thus, the incorporation expenses C
U.S.  law has a strong concept of "nexus," which is a C>
Because of a long history of operating in the C>
U.S., numerous meetings in the U.S., and the large number of C>
U.S. residents who are participants and leaders, we feel it is C>
words, incorporating in a country besides the U.S.
Incorporating in a country other than the US may have tax C>
It is very likely that the IETF Administrative Support C>
a tax exempt application should be quite straight forward.
The incorporation laws of the U.S.
states being considered do C
(e.g., there are no C>
only to "business enterprises", and do not apply to non profit C
Since this document recommends incorporating in the U.S., C>>
Virginia is the logical pick as the state of domicile to allow C>
Appendix C.  Risk Analysis C
This scenario (as do all scenarios) has some risks.
summarizes why we think we can accept the risk or what kind of C>
we think we can take if the risk indeed materializes into C>
As explained in [I D.malamud consultant report], incorporating in C>
the US carries two specific risks: the perception of the IETF C>
The IETF is an international organization.
the fact that the IETF standards processes are run in English and C>
that many of its current support organizations are US based C
leaves an impression that the IETF is too US centric.
Incorporating the new administrative entity in the US may add to C>
Incorporating the administrative entity in the C>
US may invite more US governmental interference in the standards
course, the primary reason to consider US incorporation is C>
We agree that the expedience makes US incorporation C>
But incorporating in multiple domiciles would C>
Assuming we go down the path of C>
US incorporation, we would like legal counsel to advise on the C>
possibility of incorporating in other domiciles (specifically C>
Switzerland and The Netherlands) at a later date after US C>
If this is (as we suspect)
indeed possible, we think this would be the best way to go C>
C.2  Non profit status risk C
One of the risks pointed out to incorporation
that we would not get non profit status, and that we must C>
therefore preserve some money in escrow for tax liability C
Estimates for the time it will take to get such status C>
If the IASF is only taking in C>
enough money to cover expenses
, there would be very little tax C>
However, if more revenue is brought in than is spent, C>
To mitigate this risk, the corporation could be created and non  C>
This way, no money would need to be in escrow during the C>
fairly clear non profit nature of the IETF.
expenses and keeping an appropriate escrow account seems like a C>
Further, any fund raising campaigns that result in C>
cautiously until non profit status is granted.
It is important that the execution goes well.
Risks that we are C>
we can't hire a good IAD C
we fail to project cash flow properly and go
we can't cut a deal with Foretec and have no 2005 meetings
we get bad lawyers and they take too long and charge too much C
isoc runs out of money and doesn't tell us early enough C>
In order to mitigate these problems we have a proposed work plan C>
It is important that we get review of C>
this work plan by as many eyes as we can get, to make sure
fiscal or administrative practices could expose the IETF to a C>
Improper formulation of the legal framework underlying the IETF C>
Any such risk under this C>
under the current legal framework.
This risk is further C>
mitigated by a thorough review by legal counsel, and by use of C>
The legal exposure is best minimized by a careful adherence to C>
our procedures and processes, as defined by the Best Current C>
define the standards process are the best insurance against legal C
Adherence to a public rule book and C>
a fully open process are the most effective mechanisms
This Appendix reproduces the contents of an Internet Draft defining Scenario O, as it was posted on 20 September 2004.
A table of contents has been removed from this copy and the text has been reformatted to fit within IETF publication guidelines.
Each line is prefixed with "O>>".
An IETF Directed Activity Housed Under the O>
This document defines an alternative proposal for the structure
defined and directed activity that operates within the ISOC legal O>
It proposes the creation of an IETF Administrative O>
Oversight Committee (IAOC) that is selected by and accountable to O>
This committee would provide oversight for O>
the IETF administrative support activity, which would be housed O
within the ISOC legal umbrella.
In order to allow the community O>
to properly evaluate this scenario, some draft BCP wording is O>
IETF community discussions of the scenarios for administrative O>
an IETF defined and directed administrative support
continued close relationship with ISOC O
a clear basis from which the IETF can define (and, over time, O>
the administrative activity in terms of IETF community
an operational oversight board that is accountable to the IETF O>
continued separation between the IETF standards activity and O>
any fund raising for standards work (within ISOC)
appropriate ISOC oversight of its standards activities funds
This scenario is nicknamed "Scenario O"
it is derived from, O>
but does not entirely encompass, Scenario A or Scenario B. O
In Scenario O, the IETF administrative support function would be O>
defined in a BCP that would be created via the IETF standards O>
This BCP would describe the scope of an IETF Administrative O>
Support Activity (IASA) and would define the structure and
responsibilities of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee O>
(IAOC), an IETF selected body responsible for overseeing the O
Like the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), the IASA would O>
be housed within the ISOC legal umbrella.
The BCP would also O>
describe ISOC's responsibilities within this scenario, including O>
they meet the community's needs,  and adjusting them from time to O
At the same time, it does not require O>
that the IETF community determine, create and undertake the risks
associated with an appropriate corporate structure (with similar O
order to solve the pressing administrative issues outlined in O>>
This proposal also defines the boundaries of the IASA O>
Draft of Administrative Support BCP O>
This section proposes draft text for a BCP that would define the O
Although this text would O>
require further refinement within the IETF community,
2.1  Definition of the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)
The IETF undertakes its technical activities as an ongoing, open, O>
The Internet Society has long been a O>
part of the IETF's standards process, and this document does not O
affect the ISOC IETF working relationship concerning standards
this memo is to define an administrative support activity that is O>
responsive to the IETF technical community's needs, as well as O>
consistent with ISOC's operational, financial and fiduciary O>
should include the detail as an appendix), covering IETF document
administrative backdrop required to support the IETF standards
including the IESG, IAB and working groups.
The IASA is responsible for ensuring O>
that the IETF's administrative activities are done and done well; O>>
it is not the expectation that the IASA will undertake the work
the contractual relationships in line with key operating O>
principles such as efficiency, transparency and cost
The IASA is distinct from other IETF related technical functions, O>
such as the RFC editor, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority O>
The IASA is not O>
intended to have any influence on the technical decisions of the O>
IETF or on the technical contents of IETF work.
2.1.1  Structure of the IASA O>
It will determine the ongoing success of the activity
IETF community needs laid out in this BCP, as well as O
ISOC oversight of its financial and resource contributions.
The IAOC will consist O>
, all chosen directly or indirectly by the IETF O>
The IAOC will be accountable to the O>>
IETF community for the effectiveness, efficiency and transparency
The IASA will initially consist of a single full time employee of O>>
ISOC, the IETF Administrative Director (IAD).
require a variety of financial, legal and administrative support, O>
Although the IAD will be a full time ISOC employee, he will work O>
under the direction of the IAOC.
This same committee will be responsible for O>
periodically reviewing the performance of the IAD and determining O>
any changes to his employment and compensation.
President may make summary decisions, to be reviewed by the O>
hiring committee after the fact.
The IAD will be responsible for administering the IETF finances, O>
managing a separate bank account for the IASA, and establishing
To perform these activities, O>
the IAD is expected to have signing authority comparable to other
Generally, expenses or agreements O>
outside that authority to be approved for financial soundness as O
The joint expectation is that
policies will be consistent with allowing the IAD to carry out O>>
IASA work effectively and efficiently.
Should the IAOC have O>
other policies that are mutually agreeable.
The IAD will also fill the role of the IETF Executive Director, O>
administrative functions will be outsourced via
The IAD will be responsible for negotiating and O>
maintaining those contracts, as well as providing any O
The day to day responsibilities of the IAD will focus on managing O
The IAD will provide regular (monthly and quarterly) reports to O>
All contracts will be negotiated by the IAD (with input from any O>
other appropriate bodies), and reviewed by the IAOC.
whatever review ISOC requires (e.g., legal, Board of Trustees).
The IAD will be responsible for presenting O>
this budget to the ISOC Board of Trustees, as part of ISOC's
The partnering is such that O>
the IAOC is responsible for ensuring the suitability of the O>
bear fiduciary responsibility; the ISOC board needs to review and O>
understand the budget and planned activity in have enough detail
The role of the IAOC is to provide appropriate input to the IAD, O>
The IAOC is not expected O>
to be regularly engaged in IASA work, but rather to provide O
Therefore, the IAOC's responsibilities are: O>
Select the IAD, as described above.
Review the IAD's financial reports, and provide approval of O>
the IAD's budget proposals in terms of fitness for IETF O
Review IASA functioning with respect to meeting the IETF
The IAOC's role is to review, not carry out the work of,  the IAD O>
As such, it is expected the IAOC will have monthly O>
coincident with IETF plenary meetings, consistent with ensuring O>
an efficient and effective operation.
The IASA is supported financially in 3 ways:
The IAD, in consultation with the O>
IAOC, sets the meeting fees as part of the budgeting process.
All meeting revenues go to the IASA.
The IETF and IASA do no specific
interested in supporting the IETF activity will continue to O>
be directed to ISOC, and any funds ISOC receives
(as part of an ISOC program that allows O>
will be put in the IASA bank O>
ISOC will deposit in the IASA account, O>
each quarter, the funds committed to providing as part of the O>
IASA budget (where the meeting revenues and specific O>
donations do not cover the budget).
These funds may come O>
from member fees or from other revenue streams
the IAOC and ISOC are expected to work together to attain O>
(I.e., dropping the meeting fees to $0 and expecting O
Also, in normal operating circumstances, the IASA would look to O>
have a 6 month operating reserve for its activities.
having the IASA attempt to accrue that in its bank account, the O>
IASA looks to ISOC to build and provide that operational reserve
Such reserves do not O>
appear instantaneously; the goal is to reach that level of O
expected that any funds associated with such reserve will be held O>
in the IASA bank account.
IAOC Membership, Selection and Accountability O>
This section is particularly subject to change as we work
principles being adhered to are that while this should be O>
reasonably separate from IETF Standards process management:
the IETF and IAB Chairs need to be involved to a level that O>
permits them to be involved in and oversee the aspects
pertinent to their roles in managing the technical work (e.g., O>
the IAB looks after the RFC Editor relationship)
the IETF and IAB Chairs must not be critical path to getting
Future versions may change either or both, depending on O>>
what makes sense to the IETF community in its deliberations.
The IAOC will consist of seven voting members who will be O>
2 members chosen by the IETF Nominations Committee (NomCom)
The IETF Chair (ex officio)
The ISOC President/CEO (ex officio)
There will also be two non voting
The IETF Administrative Director O
The voting members of the IAOC will choose their own chair each O>
year using a consensus mechanism of its choosing.
the IETF Chair or the ISOC President/CEO).
The role of the IAOC O>
Chair is to organize the IAOC.
The IAOC Chair has no formal O
The members of the IAOC will typically serve two year terms.
Initially, the IESG and ISOC Board will make one year
Nomcom will make one one year appointment and one two year
the IAOC is selected each term.
The two NomCom selected members will be selected using the O>
procedures described in RFC 3777.
For the initial selection, the O>
In later years, this list will be provided by the O>
While there are no hard rules regarding how the IAB and the IESG O
choose people who are familiar with the administrative support
needs of the IAB, the IESG and/or the IETF standards process.
The IAB and IESG are O>
encouraged to look at the procedure for IAB selection of ISOC O>
Trustees for an example of how this might work.
Although the IAB and IESG will choose some members of the IAOC, O>
those members will not directly represent the bodies that chose O>
All members of the IAOC are accountable directly to the O
To receive direct feedback from the community, O>
This may take the form of an open IAOC plenary or O>
a working meeting held during an IETF meeting slot.
Decisions of IAOC members or the entire IAOC are subject to O
appeal using the procedures described in RFC 2026.
appeals of WG Chair, IESG or IAB decisions.
In the event that an IAOC member abrogates his duties or acts O>
IAB and IESG appointed members of the IAOC are not subject O>
While the IASA sets a budget for the IETF's administrative needs, O>
its budget process clearly needs to be closely coordinated with O>>
The specific timeline will be established each year, O>
before the second IETF meeting.
A general annual timeline for O>>
The IAD presents a budget proposal (for the following O>
The IAOC approves the budget proposal for IETF purposes, O>
As the ISOC President is O>
part of the IAOC, the IAOC should have a preliminary O>
The budget proposal is passed to the O>
The ISOC Board of Trustees approves the budget
During the next 2 months, the budget O>
November 1 Final budget to the ISOC Board for approval.
The IAD will provide monthly accountings of expenses, and will O>>
update forecasts of expenditures quarterly.
the adjustment of the IASA budget.
The revised budget will need O>
2.4  Relationship of the IAOC to Existing IETF Leadership O>
The IAOC will be directly accountable to the IETF Community.
However, the nature of the IAOC's work will involve treating the O>
The IAOC should not consider O>
its work successful unless the IESG and IAB are satisfied with O>
the administrative support that they are receiving.
ISOC Responsibilities for IASA O
Within ISOC, support for the IASA should be structured to meet O>
The IETF community should have complete visibility
into the financial and legal structure of the ISOC standards
In particular, the IETF community should have access
to a detailed budget for the entire standards activity, O
addition, key contract material and MOUs should be publicly O>
Most of these goals are already met by ISOC today.
The IAOC will be responsible for providing the IETF community
with regular overviews of the state of affairs.
As part of this arrangement, ISOC's sponsorship of O>
for the IETF will be managed as part of the IASA under the O
The IASA should be financially and legally distinct O>
IETF meeting fees should be O>
deposited in a separate IETF specific bank account and used to O
Any fees or payments collected from IETF meeting sponsors O>
be administered by the IAD and used to fund the IASA in O>
with temporary cash flow issues.
These cases should be O>>
carefully documented and tracked on both sides.
Removability: While there is no current plan to transfer the O>
the IASA should be structured to enable a clean transition in O>
before the transition formally occurs.
the IAOC and ISOC will work together to create a smooth O>
All contracts that are O>
from ISOC in the future.
Any accrued funds, and IETF specific
and/ or tools) would also be expected to be transitioned to O>
any new entity, as well.
Within the constraints outlined above, all other details of how O>
should be determined by ISOC O>
in consultation with the IAOC.
Workplan for Formalizing the IETF Administrative Support O>
This section proposes a workplan and schedule for formalizing the O
IETF administrative support activity (IASA) for the remainder of O
This workplan is intended to satisfy four goals:
Satisfy the IETF's need for support functions through 2005,
Establish IETF community consensus and ISOC approval of a BCP O
formalizing the IASA as described in this scenario before any O>
Make sure that decisions with long term impact, such as hiring
Within the above constraints, move as quickly as possible
towards a well defined administrative support structure that O>
There are three major elements to this workplan which can, to O>
some degree, take place in parallel after we establish IETF O>
community consensus to pursue Scenario
Finalizing the BCP text and getting it approved by the IETF O
Negotiating agreements with service providers.
determining the structure and work flow of the IASA, deciding
which portions of the IASA should be staffed via an open O>
those portions, as well as establishing sole source contracts
Each of the three items listed above is described in more detail
3.3  Approval by the IETF Community and ISOC O
In scenario O, the IASA is formalized in a BCP that is approved
There are three steps in this process:
Establishment of IETF community consensus that we should O
pursue Scenario O as defined in a joint IAB/IESG O
Establishment of IETF community consensus on a BCP that O>
formalizes the IASA as described.
This consensus would be O>
established through public discussion, a four week IETF
Call and IESG review and approval.
ISOC approval of the BCP and acceptance of ISOC's
acceptance would be signified by an ISOC Board resolution.
The timeline for these three stages is rather long, but there is O>
established IETF community consensus to pursue this scenario.
Once we have IETF consensus to pursue this scenario, we can O>
appoint an interim IAOC to begin working on the IASA transition.
The interim IAOC could do substantial work on non binding tasks, O>
the structure of the IASA work, issuing RFPs and negotiating
appropriate consultants and advisors to make a lot of progress
Because the IETF Nominations Commitee (NomCom) process for new O>
positions will consume a lot of resources and take a long time to O>
, we propose that the interim IAOC consist of: O>
1 IESG selected member O
1 IAB selected member O
1 ISOC selected member O
The IAB chair will serve as a liaison, as described above.
The IESG and ISOC Board appointments will be expected to serve O>
assuming that the BCP is approved and the IAOC continues to have O>
appointed members from these bodies.
After all of the interim IAOC members are selected, they will O>
choose an interim IAOC chair from among the appointed members.
When the BCP is approved, if the BCP indicates that there will be O>
NomCom selected IAOC members they will be chosen at that time.
The IAOC will transition from O
interim to non interim status when all non interim members are O>
Recruiting the IETF Administrative Director O
The IAD selection committee should determine a job description
for the IAD, in consultation with other IETF leaders and the IETF
Although the interim IAOC is not empowered to hire the IAD as a O>>
full time employee, it might be possible for the IAOC to ask ISOC
Establishing Agreement with Service Providers O
The most important activity of the IAOC during late 2004 and O>
early 2005 will be to determine the structure and work flow of O>
service providers to do the required work.
the following functions as defined in the consultant's report:
IANA services to support IETF standards publication
The interim IAOC should work with IETF leaders and other O>
knowledgeable members of the community to determine the structure
corresponding adjustments to the above list, if necessary.
interim IAOC can also identify which areas of IASA work should O>
work with those providers to establish proposed contracts or O>
they believe should be filled through an open RFP process.
Establishing a 2005 Operating Budget O
Because the ISOC 2005 budgeting process will be finalized before O>
the non interim IAOC is seated, the interim IAOC should work with O>
Since this will happen in advance O>
Proposed Schedule for IASA Transition O
As described above, the three stages of the IETF community and O>>
ISOC approval process will take some time.
an optimistic schedule for this approval would be:
IETF discussion of this proposal and other scenarios through O>
Community discussion of the joint IAB/IESG recommendation
Two week community consensus call issued on the IETF list on O>
IAOC selecting bodies begin search, based on O>
Rough community consensus declared on 8 Nov 04 to pursue O>
Scenario O and appoint the interim IAOC.
Interim IAOC seated on 15 Nov 04.
estimated 2005 budget and IAD recruitment.
BCP text  discussed by community, IETF leadership and ISOC O>
Board until we have something that represents rough O>
this could be completed by 6 Dec 04.
Four week IETF Last Call issued for BCP on 6 Dec 04
Simultaneous IESG and ISOC Board approvals by 17 Jan 04.
IAD officially hired in Jan 2005.
NomCom seats IAOC members at the first IETF of 2005, moving O>
Formal agreements with all service providers in place by O>
This document describes a scenario for the structure of the O>
This document has no IANA considerations in the traditional O>
As part of the extended IETF family, though, IANA may be O>
Most of the ideas in this document are not new, and
did not originate with the authors.
This document was written using the xml2rfc tool described in RFC O>>
[I D.malamud consultant report] Malamud, C., "IETF Administrative O>
(work in progress), September 2004.
Revision 3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.
The IETF in the Large: Administration O>
[RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629, O>
Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, O>
[RFC3668]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF O
leslie at verisignlabs.com, leslie at thinkingcat.com
1 617 758 4177 O>>
Informative References [1]  IAB Advisory Committee, "The IETF in the Large: Administration and Execution", RFC 3716, March 2004.
[2]  Malamud, C., "IETF Administrative Support Functions", Work in Progress, September 2004.
Author's Address Scott Hollenbeck, Editor IAB and IESG EMail: sah@428cobrajet.net
Full Copyright Statement Copyright (C)
This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.
This document and the information contained herein are provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE
(IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in this document or the extent to which any license under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.
Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.
Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on line IPR repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.
The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement this standard.
Please address the information to the IETF at ietf  ipr@ietf.org.
Acknowledgement Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the Internet Society.
