Abstract This document defines extensions to the vCard data format for representing and exchanging contact information used to implement the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) operational profile for the Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP).
The property and parameter defined here are used to add values to RDAP responses that are consistent with ICANN policies.
The "Temporary Specification for gTLD Registration Data" available at <https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/gtld registration data specs
en> was published by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Named and Numbers (ICANN) in 2018.
The Temporary Specification includes requirements that cannot currently be met by the Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP, [RFC7483]) without extending the underlying vCard [RFC6350] specification used to represent RDAP entity objects.
This document includes specifications for an additional vCard property and an additional vCard parameter to meet the requirements of the Temporary Specification.
Terminology Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
Syntax specifications shown here use the augmented Backus Naur Form (ABNF) as described in [RFC5234] and are specified as in the base vCard specification [RFC6350].
This document describes one new vCard extension property.
CONTACT URI Purpose: RDAP entity information can be redacted under certain circumstances (e.g., privacy).
The Temporary Specification requires that RDAP entity objects representing "Registrant", "Admin", and "Tech" contacts contain an email address or a location for a web form to facilitate email communication with the relevant contact in a way that does not identify the associated individual.
The CONTACT URI property can be used to include URIs representing an email address or a location for a web form.
PREF Description: At least one "mailto", "http", or "https" URI value MUST be provided.
Additional CONTACT URI properties MAY be provided to describe other contact methods.
If multiple CONTACT URI properties are used, the vCard PREF parameter MUST be used to describe the most preferred property as described in Section 5.3 of RFC 6350
Format definition: CONTACT URI param
"VALUE uri" / pref param ; pref param from [RFC6350]
CONTACT URI value   uri ; uri from [RFC3986] Examples:
This document describes one new vCard extension parameter.
CC Purpose: ICANN requires the use of ISO 3166 [ISO.3166.1988] two  letter codes, not "country names", in RDAP entity responses.
This parameter is used to extend the ADR property described in Section 6.3.1 of RFC 6350 [RFC6350].
Description: This parameter contains the ISO 3166
two character country code associated with the "country name" ADR component described in Section 6.3.1 of RFC 6350
"CC " 2ALPHA Examples: ADR;TYPE work;CC US:;;54321 Oak St;Reston;VA;20190;USA ADR;TYPE home;CC
IANA Considerations IANA has added the following entry to the "vCard Properties" registry defined in Section 10.3.1 of RFC 6350 [RFC6350].
Section 2.1 of RFC 8605 (this RFC)
IANA is requested to add the following entry to the vCard Parameters registry defined in Section 10.3.2 of RFC 6350 [RFC6350].
CC Reference: Section 3.1 of RFC 8605 (this RFC) 5.
The CONTACT URI value is purposefully intended to be a publicly visible contact reference; as such, it cannot require confidentiality protection.
There are, however, privacy implications in the choice of a URI scheme for the web form contact method.
An "https" URI value can be used to indicate support for confidentiality protection for connections to the server that publishes the web form.
This document presents no other security considerations beyond those described in Section 9 of the base vCard specification [RFC6350].
