Abstract This document specifies a Diameter application that can be used to implement real time credit control for a variety of end user services such as network access, Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) services, messaging services, and download services.
The Diameter Credit  Control application as defined in this document obsoletes RFC 4006, and it must be supported by all new Diameter Credit Control application implementations.
This document specifies a Diameter application that can be used to implement real time credit control for a variety of end user services such as network access, Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) services, messaging services, and download services.
("Credit control" is sometimes abbreviated as "CC" in figures and tables throughout this document.)
The Diameter Credit Control application as defined in this document obsoletes [RFC4006], and it must be supported by all new Diameter Credit Control application implementations.
This document provides a general solution to real time cost and credit control.
The prepaid model has been shown to be very successful   for instance, in GSM networks, where network operators offering prepaid services have experienced a substantial growth of their customer base and revenues.
Prepaid services are now cropping up in many other wireless and wire line based networks.
In mobile networks, additional functionality is required beyond that specified in the Diameter base protocol [RFC6733].
For example, the 3GPP charging and billing requirements document [TGPPCHARG] states that an application must be able to rate service information in real time.
In addition, it is necessary to check that the end user's account provides coverage for the requested service prior to initiation of that service.
When an account is exhausted or expired, the user must be denied the ability to compile additional chargeable events.
A mechanism has to be provided to allow the user to be informed of the charges to be levied for a requested service.
In addition, there are services such as gaming and advertising that may credit as well as debit a user account.
The other Diameter applications provide service specific authorization, and they do not provide credit authorization for prepaid users.
The credit authorization shall be generic and applicable to all the service environments required to support prepaid services.
To fulfill these requirements, it is necessary to facilitate credit control communication between the network element providing the service (e.g., Network Access Server (NAS), SIP Proxy, Application Server) and a credit control server.
The scope of this specification is credit authorization.
Service  specific authorization and authentication are out of scope.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
Terminology AAA:  Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting.
"AA Answer" generically refers to a service specific authorization and authentication answer.
AA Answer commands are defined in service specific authorization applications, e.g., [RFC7155]
"AA Request" generically refers to a service specific authorization and authentication request.
AA Request commands are defined in service specific authorization applications, e.g., [RFC7155]
"Credit control" is a mechanism that directly interacts in real time with an account and controls or monitors the charges related to service usage.
Credit control is a process of (1) checking whether or not credit is available, (2) credit reservation, (3) deduction of credit from the end user account when service is completed, and (4) refunding of reserved credit that is not used.
Diameter Credit Control server:  A Diameter Credit Control server acts as a prepaid server, performing real time rating and credit control.
It is located in the home domain and is accessed by Service Elements or Diameter AAA servers in real time, for the purpose of price determination and credit control before the service event is delivered to the end user.
It may also interact with Business Support Systems.
Diameter Credit Control client:  A Diameter Credit Control client is an entity that interacts with a credit control server.
It monitors the usage of the granted quota according to instructions returned by the credit control server.
The Diameter Credit Control client uses interrogation to initiate a session based credit control process.
During the credit control process, it is used to report the used quota and request a new one.
An interrogation maps to a request/answer transaction.
One time event:  A charging transaction session comprising a single request and single response.
The act of determining the cost of the service event.
A type of task performed by a Service Element for an end user.
Service Element:  A network element that provides a service to the end users.
The Service Element may include the Diameter Credit Control client or another entity (e.g., a RADIUS AAA server) that can act as a credit control client on behalf of the Service Element.
In the latter case, the interface between the Service Element and the Diameter Credit Control client is outside the scope of this specification.
Examples of Service Elements include NASs, SIP Proxies, and Application Servers such as messaging servers, content servers, and gaming servers.
Service event:  An event relating to a service provided to the end user.
Session based credit control:  A credit control process that makes use of several interrogations: the first, a possible intermediate, and the final.
The first interrogation is used to reserve money from the user's account and to initiate the process.
Intermediate interrogations (if any) may be needed to request a new quota while the service is being rendered.
The final interrogation is used to exit the process.
The credit control server is required to maintain session state for session based credit control.
Advertising Application Support Diameter nodes conforming to this specification MUST advertise support by including the value of 4 in the Auth Application
Id of the Capabilities Exchange Request and Capabilities Exchange Answer
The current accounting models specified in the RADIUS accounting and Diameter base specifications [RFC2866]
[RFC6733] are not sufficient for real time credit control, where creditworthiness is to be determined prior to service initiation.
Also, the existing Diameter authorization applications [RFC7155]
[RFC4004] only provide service authorization; they do not provide credit authorization for prepaid users.
In order to support real time credit control, a new type of server is needed in the AAA infrastructure: the Diameter Credit Control server.
The Diameter Credit Control server is the entity responsible for credit authorization for prepaid subscribers.
A Service Element may authenticate and authorize the end user with the AAA server by using AAA protocols, e.g., RADIUS or the Diameter base protocol (possibly extended via a Diameter application).
Accounting protocols such as RADIUS accounting and the Diameter base accounting protocol can be used to provide accounting data to the accounting server after service is initiated and to provide possible interim reports until service completion.
However, for real time credit control, these authorization and accounting models are not sufficient.
When real time credit control is required, the credit control client contacts the credit control server with information about a possible service event.
The credit control process is performed to determine potential charges and to verify whether the end user's account balance is sufficient to cover the cost of the service being rendered.
Figure 1 illustrates the typical credit control architecture, which consists of a Service Element with an embedded Diameter Credit Control client, a Diameter Credit Control server, and a AAA server.
A Business Support System is usually deployed; at a minimum, it includes billing functionality.
The credit control server and AAA server in this architecture model are logical entities.
The real configuration can combine them into a single host.
The credit control protocol is the Diameter base protocol [RFC6733] with the Diameter Credit Control application.
When an end user requests services such as SIP or messaging, the request is typically forwarded to a Service Element (e.g., a SIP Proxy) in the user's home realm as defined in [RFC6733].
In some cases, it might be possible that the Service Element in the local realm [RFC6733] can offer services to the end user; however, a commercial agreement must exist between the local realm and the home realm.
Network access is an example of a service offered in the local realm where the NAS, through a AAA infrastructure, authenticates and authorizes the user with the user's home network.
: Typical Credit Control Architecture
There can be multiple credit control servers in the system for redundancy and load balancing.
The system can also contain separate rating server(s), and accounts can be located in a centralized database.
To ensure that the end user's account is not debited or credited multiple times for the same service event, only one entity in the credit control system should perform duplicate detection.
System internal interfaces can exist to relay messages between servers and an account manager.
However, the detailed architecture of the credit control system and its interfaces is implementation specific and is out of scope for this specification.
Protocol transparent Diameter relays can exist between the credit control client and credit control server.
Also, Diameter redirect agents that refer credit control clients to credit control servers and allow them to communicate directly can exist.
These agents transparently support the Diameter Credit Control application.
The different roles of Diameter agents are defined in Diameter base [RFC6733], Section 2.8.
If Diameter Credit Control proxies exist between the credit control client and the credit control server, they MUST advertise support for the Diameter Credit Control application.
This section defines new Diameter message Command Code values that MUST be supported by all Diameter implementations that conform to this specification.
Credit Control Commands Section 3.2 of [RFC6733]
(Diameter base) defines the Command Code Format specification.
These formats are observed in credit control messages.
The Credit Control Request message (CCR) is indicated by the Command Code field being set to 272 and the 'R' bit being set in the Command Flags field.
It is used between the Diameter Credit Control client and the credit control server to request credit authorization for a given service.
The Auth Application Id MUST be set to the value 4, indicating the Diameter Credit Control application.
The CCR is extensible via the inclusion of one or more Attribute Value Pairs (AVPs).
< Diameter Header: 272, REQ, PXY >
[ Acct Multi Session Id ]
[ Origin State Id ]
[ Subscription Id Extension ]
[ CC Correlation Id ]
The Credit Control Answer message (CCA) is indicated by the Command Code field being set to 272 and the 'R' bit being cleared in the Command Flags field.
It is used between the credit control server and the Diameter Credit Control client to acknowledge a Credit Control Request command.
< Diameter Header: 272, PXY >
[ CC Session Failover ]
[ CC Sub Session Id ]
[ Acct Multi Session Id ]
[ Origin State Id ]
[ Redirect Host Usage ]
[ Redirect Max Cache Time ]
The credit authorization process takes place before and during service delivery to the end user and generally requires the user's authentication and authorization before any requests are sent to the credit control server.
The credit control application defined in this specification supports two different credit authorization models: credit authorization with money reservation and credit authorization with direct debiting.
In both models, the credit control client requests credit authorization from the credit control server prior to allowing any services to be delivered to the end user.
In the first model, the credit control server rates the request, reserves a suitable amount of money from the user's account, and returns the amount of credit reserved.
Note that credit resources may not imply actual monetary credit
; credit resources may be granted to the credit control client in the form of units (e.g., data volume or time) to be metered.
Upon receipt of a successful credit authorization answer with a certain amount of credit resources, the credit control client allows service delivery to the end user and starts monitoring the usage of the granted resources.
When the credit resources granted to the user have been consumed or the service has been successfully delivered or terminated, the credit control client reports back to the server the used amount.
The credit control server deducts the used amount from the end user's account; it may perform rating and make a new credit reservation if the service delivery is continuing.
This process is accomplished with session based credit control that includes the first interrogation, possible intermediate interrogations, and the final interrogation.
For session based credit control, both the credit control client and the credit control server are required to maintain credit control session state.
Session based credit control is described in more detail, with more variations, in Section 5.
In contrast, credit authorization with direct debiting is a single transaction process wherein the credit control server directly deducts a suitable amount of money from the user's account as soon as the credit authorization request is received.
Upon receipt of a successful credit authorization answer, the credit control client allows service delivery to the end user.
This process is accomplished with the one time event.
Session state is not maintained.
In a multi service environment, an end user can issue an additional service request (e.g., data service) during an ongoing service (e.g., voice call) toward the same account.
Alternatively, during an active multimedia session, an additional media type is added to the session, causing a new simultaneous request toward the same account.
Consequently, this needs to be considered when credit resources are granted to the services.
The credit control application also supports operations such as service price inquiries, user's balance checks, and refunds of credit on the user's account.
These operations are accomplished with the one time event.
Session state is not maintained.
Flexible failure handling, specific to the credit control application, is defined in the application.
This allows the service provider to control the credit control client's behavior according to its own risk management policy.
The Credit Control Failure Handling AVP (also referred to as the CCFH) and the Direct Debiting Failure Handling AVP (also referred to as the DDFH) are defined to determine what is done if the sending of credit control messages to the credit control server has been temporarily prevented.
The usage of the CCFH and the DDFH allows flexibility, as failure handling for the credit control session and one time event direct debiting may be different.
Service Specific Rating Input and Interoperability
The Diameter Credit Control application defines the framework for credit control; it provides generic credit control mechanisms supporting multiple service applications.
The credit control application therefore does not define AVPs that could be used as input in the rating process.
Listing the possible services that could use this Diameter application is out of scope for this generic mechanism.
It is reasonable to expect that a service level agreement will exist between providers of the credit control client and the credit control server covering the charging, services offered, roaming agreements, agreed upon rating input (i.e., AVPs), and so on.
Therefore, it is assumed that a Diameter Credit Control server will provide service only for Diameter Credit Control clients that have agreed beforehand as to the content of credit control messages.
Naturally, it is possible that any arbitrary Diameter Credit Control client can interchange credit control messages with any Diameter Credit Control server, but with a higher likelihood that unsupported services/AVPs could be present in the credit control message, causing the server to reject the request with an appropriate Result Code.
There are two ways to provide rating input to the credit control server: by either using AVPs or including the rating input in the Service Parameter Info AVP.
The general principles for sending rating parameters are as follows:
The service SHOULD reuse existing AVPs if it can use AVPs defined in existing Diameter applications (e.g.
, [RFC7155] for network access services).
[RFC6733] strongly recommends the reuse of existing AVPs.
For AVPs of type Enumerated, the service may require a new value to be defined.
Allocation of new AVP values is done as specified in [RFC6733], Section 1.3.
B.  New AVPs can be defined if the existing AVPs do not provide sufficient rating information.
In this case, the procedures defined in [RFC6733] for creating new AVPs MUST be followed.
For services specific only to one vendor's implementation, a vendor specific AVP code for private use can be used.
Where a vendor specific AVP is implemented by more than one vendor, allocation of global AVPs is encouraged instead; refer to [RFC6733].
The Service Parameter Info AVP MAY be used as a container to pass legacy rating information in its original encoded form (e.g., ASN.1 BER).
This method can be used to avoid unnecessary conversions from an existing data format to an AVP format.
In this case, the rating input is embedded in the Service Parameter  Info AVP as defined in Section 8.43.
New service applications SHOULD favor the use of explicitly defined AVPs as described in items 1a and 1b, to simplify interoperability.
The service specific rating input AVPs, and the contents of the Service Parameter Info AVP or Service Context
AVP (defined in Section 8.42), are not within the scope of this document.
To facilitate interoperability, it is RECOMMENDED that the rating input and the values of the Service Context Id be coordinated via an informational RFC or other permanent and readily available reference (preferably that of another cooperative standardization body, e.g., 3GPP, the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA), or 3GPP2).
However, private services may be deployed that are subject to agreements between providers of the credit control server and client.
In this case, vendor specific AVPs can be used.
This specification, together with the above mentioned service  specific documents, governs the credit control message.
Should the Service Parameter Info AVP be used, the service specific document MUST specify the exact content of this Grouped AVP.
AVP MUST be included at the command level of a Credit Control Request to identify the service specific document that applies to the request.
The specific service or rating group the request relates to is uniquely identified by the combination of Service Context Id and Service Identifier or rating group.
Handling of Unsupported/Incorrect Rating Input Diameter Credit Control implementations are required to support mandatory rating related AVPs defined in service specific documents for the services they support, according to the 'M' bit rules in [RFC6733].
If a rating input required for the rating process is incorrect in the Credit Control Request or if the credit control server does not support the requested service context (identified by the Service Context I
AVP at the command level), the Credit Control Answer MUST contain the error code DIAMETER RATING FAILED.
A CCA message with this error MUST contain one or more Failed AVP AVPs containing the missing and/or unsupported AVPs that caused the failure.
A Diameter Credit Control client that receives the error code DIAMETER RATING FAILED in response to a request MUST NOT send similar requests in the future.
RADIUS Vendor Specific Rating Attributes When service specific documents include RADIUS vendor specific attributes that could be used as input in the rating process, the rules described in [RFC7155] for formatting the Diameter AVP MUST be followed.
For example, if the AVP code used is the vendor attribute type code, the Vendor Specific flag MUST be set to 1 and the Vendor
Id MUST be set to the IANA Vendor identification value.
The Diameter AVP Data field contains only the attribute value of the RADIUS attribute.
Session Based Credit Control 5.1.
General Principles For session based credit control, several interrogations are needed: the first, the intermediate (optional), and the final.
This is illustrated in Figures 3 and 4 (Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2).
If the credit control client performs credit reservation before granting service to the end user, it MUST use several interrogations toward the credit control server (i.e., session based credit control).
In this case, the credit control server MUST maintain the credit control session state.
Each credit control session MUST have a globally unique Session Id as defined in [RFC6733]; this Session Id MUST NOT be changed during the lifetime of a credit control session.
Certain applications require multiple credit control sub sessions.
These applications would send messages with a constant Session Id AVP but with a different CC Sub Session Id AVP.
If several credit sub sessions will be used, all sub sessions MUST be closed separately before the main session is closed so that units per sub session may be reported.
The absence of the CC Sub Session
Id AVP implies that no sub sessions are in use.
Note that the Service Element might send a service specific re authorization message to the AAA server due to expiration of the authorization lifetime during an ongoing credit control session.
However, the service specific re authorization does not influence the credit authorization that is ongoing between the credit control client and credit control server, as credit authorization is controlled by the burning rate of the granted quota.
If service specific re authorization fails, the user will be disconnected, and the credit control client MUST send a final interrogation to the credit control server.
The Diameter Credit Control server may seek to control the validity time of the granted quota and/or the production of intermediate interrogations.
Thus, it MAY include the Validity Time AVP in the Answer message to the credit control client.
Upon expiration of the Validity Time, the credit control client MUST generate a credit control update request and report the used quota to the credit control server.
It is up to the credit control server to determine the value of the Validity Time to be used for consumption of the granted service unit(s)
If the Validity Time is used, its value SHOULD be given as input to set the session supervision timer Tcc (the session supervision timer MAY be set to two times the value of the Validity Time, as defined in Section 13).
Since credit control update requests are also produced at the expiry of granted service units and/or for mid session service events, the omission of Validity Time does not mean that intermediate interrogation for the purpose of credit control is not performed.
Basic Support for Tariff Time Change
The Diameter Credit Control server and client MAY optionally support a tariff change mechanism.
The Diameter Credit Control server may include a Tariff Time Change AVP in the Answer message.
Note that the granted units should be allocated based on the worst case scenario, so that the overall reported used units would never exceed the credit reservation.
For example, in the case of a forthcoming tariff change, in which the new rate is higher, the allocation should be given so it does not exceed the credit, assuming that all of it is used after the tariff changed.
When the Diameter Credit Control client reports the used units and a tariff change has occurred during the reporting period, the Diameter Credit Control client MUST separately itemize the units used before and after the tariff change.
If the client is unable to distinguish whether units straddling the tariff change were used before or after the tariff change, the credit control client MUST itemize those units in a third category.
If a client does not support the tariff change mechanism and it receives a CCA message carrying the Tariff Time Change AVP, it MUST terminate the credit control session, giving a reason of DIAMETER BAD ANSWER in the Termination Cause AVP.
For time based services, the quota is consumed at the rate of the passage of real time (ignoring leap seconds).
That is, precisely 1 second of quota is consumed per second of real time.
At the time when credit resources are allocated, the server already knows how many units will be consumed before the tariff time change and how many units will be consumed afterward.
Similarly, the server can determine the units consumed at the "before" rate and the units consumed at the "afterward" rate in the event that the end user closes the session before the consumption of the allotted quota.
There is no need for additional traffic between the client and server in the case of tariff time changes for continuous time based service.
Therefore, the tariff change mechanism is not used for such services.
For time based services in which the quota is NOT continuously consumed at a regular rate, the tariff change mechanism described for volume and event units MAY be used.
Credit Control for Multiple Services within a (Sub )Session
When multiple services are used within the same user session and each service or group of services is subject to different cost, it is necessary to perform credit control for each service independently.
Making use of credit control sub sessions to achieve independent credit control will result in increased signaling load and usage of resources in both the credit control client and the credit control server.
For instance, during one network access session, the end user may use several HTTP based services that could be charged with different costs.
The network access specific attributes, such as Quality of Service (QoS), are common to all the services carried within the access bearer, but the cost of the bearer may vary, depending on its content.
To support these scenarios optimally, the credit control application enables independent credit control of multiple services in a single credit control (sub )session.
This is achieved by including the optional Multiple Services Credit Control AVP in Credit Control  Request/Credit Control Answer messages.
It is possible to request and allocate resources as a credit pool shared between multiple services.
The services can be grouped into rating groups in order to achieve even further aggregation of credit allocation.
It is also possible to request and allocate quotas on a per service basis.
Where quotas are allocated to a pool by means of the Multiple  Services Credit Control AVP, the quotas remain independent objects that can be re authorized independently at any time.
Quotas can also be given independent result codes, validity times, and Final Unit  Indication AVP values or QoS Final Unit Indication AVP values.
A rating group gathers a set of services, identified by a Service  Identifier and subject to the same cost and rating type (e.g., $0.1/minute).
It is assumed that the Service Element is provided with rating groups, service identifiers, and their associated parameters that define what has to be metered by means outside the scope of this specification.
(Examples of parameters associated to service identifiers are IP 5 tuples and HTTP URLs.)
Service  identifiers enable authorization on a per service based credit as well as itemized reporting of service usage.
It is up to the credit control server whether to authorize credit for one or more services or for the whole rating group.
However, the client SHOULD always report used units at the finest supported level of granularity.
Where a quota is allocated to a rating group, all the services belonging to that group draw from the allotted quota.
Figure 2 provides a graphical representation of the relationship between service identifiers, rating groups, credit pools, and credit control (sub )sessions.
d a Service Id b
Multiple Service (Sub )Session Example
If independent credit control of multiple services is used, the Validity Time AVP, and the Final Unit Indication AVP or QoS Final Unit Indication AVP, SHOULD be present either in the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP(s) or at the command level as single AVPs.
However, the Result Code AVP MAY be present both at the command level and within the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP.
If the Result Code AVP at the command level indicates a value other than SUCCESS, then the Result Code AVP at the command level takes precedence over any other AVPs included in the Multiple Services  Credit Control AVP.
The credit control client MUST indicate support for independent credit control of multiple services within a (sub )session by including the Multiple Services Indicator AVP in the first interrogation.
A credit control server not supporting this feature MUST treat the Multiple Services Indicator AVP and any received Multiple Services Credit Control AVPs as invalid AVPs.
If the client indicated support for independent credit control of multiple services, a credit control server that wishes to use the feature MUST return the granted units within the Multiple Services  Credit Control AVP associated to the corresponding service identifier and/or rating group.
To avoid a situation where several parallel (and typically also small) credit reservations must be made on the same account (i.e., credit fragmentation), and also to avoid unnecessary load on the credit control server, it is possible to provide service units as a pool that applies to multiple services or rating groups.
This is achieved by providing the service units in the form of a quota for a particular service or rating group in the Multiple Services Credit  Control AVP, and also by including a reference to a credit pool for that unit type.
The reference includes a multiplier derived from the rating parameter, which translates from service units of a specific type to the abstract service units in the pool.
For instance, if the rating parameter for service 1 is $1/MB and the rating parameter for service 2 is $0.5/MB, the multipliers could be 10 and 5 for services 1 and 2, respectively.
If services or rating groups are added to or removed from the pool, then the total credit is adjusted appropriately.
Note that when the total credit is adjusted because services or rating groups are removed from the pool, the value that needs to be removed is the consumed one (i.e., Cx Mx).
Re authorizations for an individual service or rating group may be sought at any time   for example, if a "non pooled" quota is used up or the Validity Time expires.
Where multiple G S U Pool Reference AVPs (Section 8.30) with the same G S U Pool Identifier are provided within a Multiple Services Credit  Control AVP (Section 8.16) along with the Granted Service Unit AVP, these AVPs MUST have different CC Unit Type values, and they all draw from the credit pool separately.
For instance, if one multiplier for time (M1t) and one multiplier for volume (M1v) are given, then the used resources from the pool yield the sum of C1t M1t
C1v M1v, where C1t is the time unit and C1v is the volume unit.
Where service units are provided within a Multiple Services Credit  Control AVP without a corresponding G S U Pool Reference AVP, these units are handled independently from any credit pools and from any other services or rating groups within the session.
The "credit pool" concept is an optimal tool to avoid the over reservation effect of the basic single quota tariff time change mechanism (Section 5.1.1).
Therefore, Diameter Credit Control clients and servers implementing the independent credit control of multiple services SHOULD leverage the credit pool concept when supporting the tariff time change.
The Diameter Credit Control server SHOULD include both the Tariff Time Change AVP and the Tariff Change Usage AVP in two quota allocations in the Answer message (i.e., two instances of the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP).
One of the grants is allocated to be used before the potential tariff change, while the second grant is for use after a tariff change.
Both granted unit quotas MUST contain the same Service  Identifier and/or rating group.
This dual quota mechanism ensures that the overall reported used units would never exceed the credit reservation.
The Diameter Credit Control client reports the used units both before and after the tariff change in a single instance of the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP.
Failure handling for credit control sessions is defined in Section 5.7 and reflected in the basic credit control state machines defined in Section 7.
Credit control clients and servers implementing the functionality of independent credit control of multiple services in a (sub )session MUST ensure failure handling and general behavior fully consistent with Sections 5.7 and 7 while maintaining the ability to handle parallel ongoing credit re authorization within a (sub )session.
Therefore, it is RECOMMENDED that Diameter Credit Control clients maintain a PendingU message queue (Section 7) and restart the Tx timer (Section 13) every time a CCR message with the value UPDATE REQUEST is sent while they are in PendingU state.
When answers to all pending messages are received, the state machine moves to Open state, and the Tx timer is stopped.
Naturally, when a problem is detected and acted upon per Section 5.7, all of the ongoing services are affected (e.g., failover to a backup server affects all of the CCR messages in the PendingU queue).
Since the client may send CCR messages with the value UPDATE REQUEST while in PendingU state (i.e., without waiting for an answer to ongoing credit re authorization), the time space between these requests may be very short, and the server may not have received the previous request(s) yet.
Therefore, in this situation the server may receive out of sequence requests and SHOULD NOT consider this an error condition.
A proper answer is to be returned to each of those requests.
When session based credit control is required (e.g., the authentication server indicated a prepaid user), the first interrogation MUST be sent before the Diameter Credit Control client allows any service events for the end user.
The CC Request Type AVP is set to the value INITIAL REQUEST in the request message.
If the Diameter Credit Control client knows the cost of the service event (e.g., a content server delivering ringing tones may know their cost) the monetary amount to be charged is included in the Requested  Service Unit AVP.
If the Diameter Credit Control client does not know the cost of the service event, the Requested Service Unit AVP MAY contain the number of requested service events.
Where the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP is used, it MUST contain the Requested Service Unit AVP to indicate that the quota for the associated service/rating group is requested.
In the case of multiple services, the Service Identifier AVP or the Rating Group AVP within the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP always indicates the service concerned.
Additional service event information to be rated MAY be sent as service specific AVPs or MAY be sent within the Service Parameter Info AVP at the command level.
AVP indicates the service specific document applicable to the request.
The Event Timestamp AVP SHOULD be included in the request and contains the time when the service event is requested in the Service Element.
Id AVP or the Subscription Id Extension AVP SHOULD be included to identify the end user in the credit control server.
The credit control client MAY include the User Equipment  Info AVP or User Equipment Info Extension AVP so that the credit control server has some indication of the type and capabilities of the end user access device.
How the credit control server uses this information is outside the scope of this document.
The credit control server SHOULD rate the service event and make a credit reservation from the end user's account that covers the cost of the service event.
If the type of the Requested Service Unit AVP is "money", no rating is needed, but the corresponding monetary amount is reserved from the end user's account.
The credit control server returns the Granted Service Unit AVP in the Answer message to the Diameter Credit Control client.
The Granted  Service Unit AVP contains the amount of service units that the Diameter Credit Control client can provide to the end user until a new Credit Control Request MUST be sent to the credit control server.
If several unit types are sent in the Answer message, the credit control client MUST handle each unit type separately.
The type of the Granted Service Unit AVP can be time, volume, service  specific, or money, depending on the type of service event.
SHOULD NOT be changed within an ongoing credit control session.
There MUST be a maximum of one instance of the same unit type in one Answer message.
However, if multiple quotas are conveyed to the credit control client in the Multiple Services Credit Control AVPs, it is possible to carry two instances of the same unit type associated to a service identifier/rating group.
This is typically the case when a tariff time change is expected and the credit control server wants to make a distinction between the granted quota before the tariff change and the granted quota after the tariff change.
If the credit control server determines that no further control is needed for the service, it MAY include the result code indicating that the credit control is not applicable (e.g., if the service is free of charge).
This result code, at the command level, implies that the credit control session is to be terminated.
The Credit Control Answer message MAY also include the Final Unit  Indication AVP or the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP to indicate that the Answer message contains the final units for the service.
After the end user has consumed these units, the Diameter Credit Control client MUST behave as described in Section 5.6.
This document defines two different approaches for performing the first interrogation to be used in different network architectures.
The first approach uses credit control messages after the user's authorization and authentication take place.
The second approach uses (1) service specific authorization messages to perform the first interrogation during the user's authorization/authentication phase and (2) credit control messages for the intermediate and final interrogations.
If an implementation of the credit control client supports both methods, determining which method to use SHOULD be configurable.
In service environments such as NAS environments, it is desired to perform the first interrogation as part of the authorization/ authentication process for the sake of protocol efficiency.
Further credit authorizations after the first interrogation are performed with credit control commands defined in this specification.
Implementations of credit control clients operating in the environments mentioned in this document SHOULD support this method.
If the credit control server and AAA server are separate physical entities, the Service Element sends the request messages to the AAA server, which then issues an appropriate request or proxies the received request forward to the credit control server.
In other service environments, such as the 3GPP network and some SIP scenarios, there is a substantial decoupling between registration/ access to the network and the actual service request (i.e., the authentication/authorization is executed once during registration/ access to the network and is not executed for every service event requested by the subscriber).
In these environments, it is more appropriate to perform the first interrogation after the user has been authenticated and authorized.
The first, intermediate, and final interrogations are executed with credit control commands defined in this specification.
Other IETF standards or standards developed by other standardization bodies may define the most suitable method in their architectures.
First Interrogation after Authorization and Authentication
The Diameter Credit Control client in the Service Element may get information from the authorization server as to whether credit control is required, based on its knowledge of the end user.
If credit control is required, the credit control server needs to be contacted prior to initiating service delivery to the end user.
The accounting protocol and the credit control protocol can be used in parallel.
The authorization server may also determine whether the parallel accounting stream is required.
Figure 3 illustrates the case where both protocols are used in parallel and the Service Element sends credit control messages directly to the credit control server.
Accounting Answer Figure 3: Protocol Example with First Interrogation after User's Authorization/Authentication 5.2.2.
First Interrogation Included with Authorization Messages
The Diameter Credit Control client in the Service Element MUST actively co operate with the authorization/authentication client in the construction of the AA Request by adding appropriate Credit Control AVPs.
The credit control client MUST add the Credit Control AVP to indicate credit control capabilities and MAY add other relevant credit control specific AVPs to the proper authorization/authentication command to perform the first interrogation toward the home Diameter AAA server.
Id is set to the appropriate value, as defined in service specific authorization/authentication application document (e.g., [RFC7155]
The home Diameter AAA server authenticates/authorizes the subscriber and determines whether credit control is required.
If credit control is not required for the subscriber, the home Diameter AAA server will respond as usual, with an appropriate AA Answer message.
If credit control is required for the subscriber and the Credit Control AVP with the value set to CREDIT AUTHORIZATION was present in the authorization request, the home AAA server MUST contact the credit control server to perform the first interrogation.
If credit control is required for the subscriber and the Credit Control AVP was not present in the authorization request, the home AAA server MUST send an authorization reject Answer message.
The Diameter AAA server supporting credit control is required to send the Credit Control Request command (CCR) defined in this document to the credit control server.
The Diameter AAA server populates the CCR based on service specific AVPs used for input to the rating process, and possibly on Credit Control AVPs received in the AA Request.
The credit control server will reserve money from the user's account, will rate the request, and will send a Credit Control Answer message to the home Diameter AAA server.
The Answer message includes the Granted Service Unit AVP(s) and MAY include other credit control  specific AVPs, as appropriate.
Additionally, the credit control server MAY set the Validity Time and MAY include the CCFH and the DDFH to determine what to do if the sending of credit control messages to the credit control server has been temporarily prevented.
Upon receiving the Credit Control Answer message from the credit control server, the home Diameter AAA server will populate the AA Answer with the received Credit Control AVPs and with the appropriate service attributes according to the authorization/ authentication specific application (e.g., [RFC7155]
It will then forward the packet to the credit control client.
If the home Diameter AAA server receives a credit control reject message, it will simply generate an appropriate authorization reject message to the credit control client, including the credit control specific error code.
In this model, the credit control client sends further credit control messages to the credit control server via the home Diameter AAA server.
Upon receiving a successful authorization Answer message with the Granted Service Unit AVP(s), the credit control client will grant the service to the end user and will generate an intermediate Credit Control Request, if required, by using credit control commands.
The CC Request Number of the first UPDATE REQUEST MUST be set to 1 (for details regarding how to produce a unique value for the CC Request Number AVP, see Section 8.2).
If service specific re authorization is performed (i.e., the authorization lifetime expires), the credit control client MUST add to the service specific re authorization request the Credit Control AVP with a value set to RE AUTHORIZATION to indicate that the credit control server MUST NOT be contacted.
When session based credit control is used for the subscriber, a constant credit control message stream flows through the home Diameter AAA server.
The home Diameter AAA server can make use of this credit control message flow to deduce that the user's activity is ongoing; therefore, it is recommended to set the authorization lifetime to a reasonably high value when credit control is used for the subscriber.
In this scenario, the home Diameter AAA server MUST advertise support for the credit control application to its peers during the capability exchange process.
Figure 4 illustrates the use of authorization/authentication messages to perform the first interrogation.
The parallel accounting stream is not shown in the figure.
Protocol Example with Use of Authorization Messages for the First Interrogation 5.3.
When all the granted service units for one unit type are spent by the end user or the Validity Time has expired, the Diameter Credit Control client MUST send a new Credit Control Request to the credit control server.
In the event that credit control for multiple services is applied in one credit control session (i.e., units associated to Service Identifier(s) or the rating group are granted), a new Credit Control Request MUST be sent to the credit control server when the credit reservation has been wholly consumed or upon expiration of the Validity Time.
It is always up to the Diameter Credit Control client to send a new request well in advance of the expiration of the previous request in order to avoid interruption in the Service Element.
Even if the granted service units reserved by the credit control server have not been spent upon expiration of the Validity Time, the Diameter Credit Control client MUST send a new Credit Control Request to the credit control server.
There can also be mid session service events, which might affect the rating of the current service events.
In this case, a spontaneous update (a new Credit Control Request) SHOULD be sent, including information related to the service event, even if all the granted service units have not been spent or the Validity Time has not expired.
When the used units are reported to the credit control server, the credit control client will not have any units in its possession before new granted units are received from the credit control server.
When the new granted units are received, these units apply from the point where the measurement of the reported used units stopped.
Where independent credit control of multiple services is supported, this process may be executed for one or more services, a single rating group, or a pool within the (sub )session.
The CC Request Type AVP is set to the value UPDATE REQUEST in the intermediate request message.
AVP or Subscription Id Extension AVP SHOULD be included in the intermediate message to identify the end user in the credit control server.
AVP indicates the service specific document applicable to the request.
The Requested Service Unit AVP MAY contain the new amount of requested service units.
Where the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP is used, it MUST contain the Requested Service Unit AVP if a new quota is requested for the associated service/rating group.
The Used Service Unit AVP contains the amount of used service units measured from the point when the service became active or, if interim interrogations are used during the session, from the point when the previous measurement ended.
The same unit types used in the previous message SHOULD be used.
If several unit types were included in the previous Answer message, the used service units for each unit type MUST be reported.
The Event Timestamp AVP SHOULD be included in the request and contains the time of the event that triggered the sending of the new Credit Control Request.
The credit control server MUST deduct the used amount from the end user's account.
It MAY rate the new request and make a new credit reservation from the end user's account that covers the cost of the requested service event.
A Credit Control Answer message with the CC Request Type AVP set to the value UPDATE REQUEST MAY include the Cost Information AVP containing the accumulated cost estimation for the session, without taking any credit reservations into account.
The Credit Control Answer message MAY also include the Final Unit  Indication AVP or the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP to indicate that the Answer message contains the final units for the service.
After the end user has consumed these units, the Diameter Credit Control client MUST behave as described in Section 5.6.
There can be several intermediate interrogations within a session.
When the end user terminates the service session or when graceful service termination (described in Section 5.6) takes place, the Diameter Credit Control client MUST send a final Credit Control  Request message to the credit control server.
The CC Request Type AVP is set to the value TERMINATION REQUEST.
AVP indicates the service specific document applicable to the request.
The Event Timestamp AVP SHOULD be included in the request and contains the time when the session was terminated.
The Used Service Unit AVP contains the amount of used service units measured from the point when the service became active or, if interim interrogations are used during the session, from the point when the previous measurement ended.
If several unit types were included in the previous Answer message, the used service units for each unit type MUST be reported.
After final interrogation, the credit control server MUST refund the reserved credit amount not used to the end user's account and deduct the used monetary amount from the end user's account.
A Credit Control Answer message with the CC Request Type AVP set to the value TERMINATION REQUEST MAY include the Cost Information AVP containing the estimated total cost for the session in question.
If the user logs off during an ongoing credit control session or if the user becomes logged off for some other reason (e.g., a final unit indication causes user logoff according to local policy),
the Service Element, according to application specific policy, may send a Session Termination Request (STR) to the home Diameter AAA server as usual [RFC6733].
Figure 5 illustrates the case when the final unit indication causes user logoff upon consumption of the final granted units and the generation of an STR.
The Diameter AAA server responds with a Session Termination Answer (STA).
User Disconnected Due to Exhausted Account 5.5.
The Diameter Credit Control application supports server initiated re authorization.
The credit control server MAY optionally initiate the credit re authorization by issuing a Re Auth Request (RAR) as defined in the Diameter base protocol [RFC6733].
The Auth Application Id in the RAR message is set to 4 to indicate "Diameter Credit Control", and the Re Auth Request Type is set to AUTHORIZE ONLY.
Section 5.1.2 defines the feature to enable credit control for multiple services within a single (sub )session where the server can authorize credit usage at a different level of granularity.
Further, the server may provide credit resources to multiple services or rating groups as a pool (see Section 5.1.2 for details and definitions).
Therefore, the server, based on its service logic and its knowledge of the ongoing session, can decide to request credit re authorization for a whole (sub )session, a single credit pool, a single service, or a single rating group.
To request credit re authorization for a credit pool, the server includes in the RAR message the G S U Pool Identifier AVP indicating the affected pool.
To request credit re authorization for a service or a rating group, the server includes in the RAR message the Service Identifier AVP or the Rating Group AVP, respectively.
To request credit re authorization for all the ongoing services within the (sub )session, the server includes none of the above mentioned AVPs in the RAR message.
If a credit re authorization is not already ongoing (i.e., the credit control session is in Open state), a credit control client that receives an RAR message with Session
Id equal to a currently active credit control session
MUST acknowledge the request by sending the Re Auth Answer (RAA) message and MUST initiate the credit re authorization toward the server by sending a Credit Control  Request message with the CC Request Type AVP set to the value UPDATE REQUEST.
The Result Code 2002 (DIAMETER LIMITED SUCCESS) SHOULD be used in the RAA message to indicate that an additional message (i.e., a CCR message with the value UPDATE REQUEST) is required to complete the procedure.
If a quota was allocated to the service, the credit control client MUST report the used quota in the Credit Control Request.
Note that the end user does not need to be prompted for the credit re authorization, since the credit re
authorization is transparent to the user (i.e., it takes place exclusively between the credit control client and the credit control server).
Where multiple services in a user's session are supported, the procedure in the above paragraph will be executed at the granularity requested by the server in the RAR message.
If credit re authorization is ongoing at the time when the RAR message is received (i.e., an RAR CCR collision), the credit control client successfully acknowledges the request but does not initiate a new credit re authorization.
The Result Code 2001 (DIAMETER SUCCESS) SHOULD be used in the RAA message to indicate that a credit re authorization procedure is already ongoing (i.e., the client was in PendingU state when the RAR was received).
The credit control server SHOULD process the Credit Control Request as if it was received in answer to the server initiated credit re authorization and should consider the server initiated credit re authorization process successful upon reception of the RAA message.
When multiple services are supported in a user's session, the server may request credit re authorization for a credit pool (or for the (sub )session) while a credit re authorization is already ongoing for some of the services or rating groups.
In this case, the client acknowledges the server request with an RAA message and MUST send a new Credit Control Request message to perform re authorization for the remaining services/rating groups.
The Result Code 2002 (DIAMETER LIMITED SUCCESS) SHOULD be used in the RAA message to indicate that an additional message (i.e., a CCR message with the value UPDATE REQUEST) is required to complete the procedure.
The server processes the received requests and returns an appropriate answer to both requests.
The above defined procedures are enabled for each of the possibly active Diameter Credit Control sub sessions.
The server MAY request re authorization for an active sub session by including the CC Sub Session Id AVP in the RAR message in addition to the Session
When the user's account runs out of money, the user may not be allowed to compile additional chargeable events.
However, the home service provider may offer some services   for instance, access to a service portal where it is possible to refill the account   from which the user is allowed to benefit for a limited time.
The length of this time is usually dependent on the home service provider policy.
This section defines the optional graceful service termination feature.
This feature MAY be supported by the credit control server.
Credit control client implementations MUST support the Final Unit  Indication AVP or QoS Final Unit Indication AVP with at least the teardown of the ongoing service session once the subscriber has consumed all the final granted units.
Where independent credit control of multiple services in a single credit control (sub )session is supported, it is possible to use graceful service termination for each of the services/rating groups independently.
Naturally, the graceful service termination process defined in the following subsections will apply to the specific service/rating group as requested by the server.
In some service environments (e.g., NAS), graceful service termination may be used to redirect the subscriber to a service portal for online balance refill or other services offered by the home service provider.
In this case, the graceful service termination process installs a set of packet filters to restrict the user's access capability only to/from the specified destinations.
All the IP packets not matching the filters will be dropped or, possibly, redirected to the service portal.
The user may also be sent an appropriate notification as to why the access has been limited.
These actions may be communicated explicitly from the server to the client or may be configured "per service" at the client.
Explicitly signaled redirection or restriction instructions always take precedence over configured ones.
It is also possible to use graceful service termination to connect the prepaid user to a top up server that plays an announcement and prompts the user to replenish the account.
In this case, the credit control server sends only the address of the top up server where the prepaid user shall be connected after the final granted units have been consumed.
An example of this case is given in Appendix A.7.
The credit control server MAY initiate graceful service termination by including the Final Unit Indication AVP or the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP in the Credit Control Answer to indicate that the message contains the final units for the service.
When the credit control client receives the Final Unit Indication AVP or the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP in the answer from the server, its behavior depends on the value indicated in the Final Unit Action AVP.
The server may request the following actions: TERMINATE, REDIRECT, or RESTRICT ACCESS.
Figure 6 illustrates the graceful service termination procedure described in the following subsections.
In addition, the credit control server MAY reply with the Final Unit  Indication AVP or QoS Final Unit Indication AVP holding a Granted  Service Unit (G S U) with a zero grant, indicating that the service SHOULD be terminated immediately, and no further reporting is required.
Figure 7 illustrates a graceful service termination procedure that applies immediately after receiving a zero grant.
The Final Unit Indication AVP or the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP with Final Unit Action set to TERMINATE does not include any other information.
When the subscriber has consumed the final granted units, the Service Element MUST terminate the service.
This is the default handling applicable whenever the credit control client receives an unsupported Final Unit Action value and MUST be supported by all the Diameter Credit Control client implementations conforming to this specification.
A final Credit Control Request message to the credit control server MUST be sent if the Final Unit Indication AVP or the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP indicating action TERMINATE was present at the command level.
The CC Request Type AVP in the request is set to the value TERMINATION REQUEST.
The Final Unit Indication AVP or the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP with Final Unit Action set to REDIRECT indicates to the Service Element supporting this action that, upon consumption of the final granted units, the user MUST be redirected to the address specified in the Redirect Server AVP or Redirect Server Extension AVP as follows.
The credit control server sends the Redirect Server AVP or Redirect  Server Extension AVP in the Credit Control Answer message.
In such a case, the Service Element MUST redirect or connect the user to the destination specified in the Redirect Server AVP or Redirect Server  Extension AVP, if possible.
When the end user is redirected (by using protocols other than Diameter) to the specified server or connected to the top up server, an additional authorization (and possibly authentication) may be needed before the subscriber can replenish the account; however, this scenario is out of scope for this specification.
In addition to the Redirect Server AVP or Redirect Server Extension AVP, the credit control server MAY include one or more Restriction  Filter Rule AVPs, one or more Filter Rule AVPs, or one or more Filter
Id AVPs in the Credit Control Answer message to enable the user to access other services (for example, zero rated services).
In such a case, the access device MUST treat all packets according to the Restriction Filter Rule AVPs, Filter Rule AVPs, and the rules referred to by the Filter
After treatment is applied according to these rules, all traffic that has not been dropped or already forwarded MUST be redirected to the destination specified in the Redirect Server AVP or Redirect Server Extension AVP.
An entity other than the credit control server may provision the access device with appropriate IP packet filters to be used in conjunction with the Diameter Credit Control application.
This case is considered in Section 5.6.3.
When the final granted units have been consumed, the credit control client MUST perform an intermediate interrogation.
The purpose of this interrogation is to indicate to the credit control server that the specified action started and to report the used units.
The credit control server MUST deduct the used amount from the end user's account but MUST NOT make a new credit reservation.
The credit control client, however, may send intermediate interrogations before all the final granted units have been consumed for which rating and money reservation may be needed   for instance, upon Validity Time expiration or upon mid session service events that affect the rating of the current service.
Therefore, the credit control client MUST NOT include any rating related AVPs in the request sent once all the final granted units have been consumed, as an indication to the server that (1) the requested final unit action started and (2) rating and money reservation are not required (when the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP is used, the Service  Identifier AVP or the Rating Group AVP is included to indicate the services concerned).
Naturally, the Credit Control Answer message does not contain any granted service units and MUST include the Validity Time AVP to indicate to the credit control client how long the subscriber is allowed to use network resources before a new intermediate interrogation is sent to the server.
At the expiry of Validity Time, the credit control client sends a Credit Control Request (UPDATE REQUEST) as usual.
This message does not include the Used Service Unit AVP, as there is no allotted quota to report.
The credit control server processes the request and MUST perform the credit reservation.
If during this time the subscriber did not replenish their account, whether they will be disconnected or will be granted access to services not controlled by a credit control server for an unlimited time is dependent on the home service provider policy.
The latter option implies that the Service Element should not remove the restriction filters upon termination of the credit control.)
The server will return the appropriate Result Code (see Section 9.1) in the Credit Control Answer message in order to implement the policy defined action.
Otherwise, a new quota will be returned, and the Service Element MUST remove all the possible restrictions activated by the graceful service termination process and continue the credit control session and service session as usual.
The credit control client may not wait until the expiration of the Validity Time and may send a spontaneous update (a new Credit Control Request) if the Service Element can determine, for instance, that communication between the end user and the top up server took place.
An example of this case is given in Appendix A.8
Note that the credit control server may already have initiated the above described process for the first interrogation.
However, the user's account might be empty when this first interrogation is performed.
In this case, the subscriber can be offered a chance to replenish the account and continue the service.
When the credit control client receives (at either the session level or a service specific level) a Final Unit Indication AVP or QoS Final  Unit Indication AVP, together with Validity Time AVPs, but without a Granted Service Unit AVP, it immediately starts the graceful service termination process without sending any messages to the server.
An example of this case is illustrated in Appendix A.8 (Figure 18).
Restrict Access Action A Final Unit Indication AVP with Final Unit Action set to RESTRICT ACCESS
indicates to the device supporting this action that, upon consumption of the final granted units, the user's access MUST be restricted according to the IP packet filters given in the Restriction Filter Rule AVP(s) or according to the IP packet filters identified by the Filter Id AVP(s).
The credit control server SHOULD include either the Restriction Filter Rule AVP or the Filter I
AVP in the Final Unit Indication group AVP of the Credit Control Answer message.
A QoS Final Unit Indication AVP with Final Unit Action set to RESTRICT ACCESS
indicates to the device supporting this action that, upon consumption of the final granted units, the actions specified in Filter Rule AVP(s) MUST restrict the traffic according to the classifiers in the Filter Rule AVP(s).
one or more Filter Id AVPs are provided in the Credit Control Answer message, the credit control client MUST restrict the traffic according to the IP packet filters identified by the Filter Id AVP(s).
The credit control server SHOULD include either the Filter Rule AVP or the Filter I
AVP in the QoS Final Unit Indication group AVP of the Credit Control Answer message.
If both the Final Unit Indication AVP and the QoS Final Unit  Indication AVP exist in the Credit Control Answer message, a credit control client that supports the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP SHOULD follow the directives included in the QoS Final Unit  Indication AVP and SHOULD ignore the Final Unit Indication AVP.
An entity other than the credit control server may provision the access device with appropriate IP packet filters to be used in conjunction with the Diameter Credit Control application.
Such an entity may, for instance, configure the access device with IP flows to be passed when the Diameter Credit Control application indicates RESTRICT ACCESS or REDIRECT.
The access device passes IP packets according to the filter rules that may have been received in the Credit Control Answer message, in addition to those rules that may have been configured by the other entity.
However, when the user's account cannot cover the cost of the requested service, the action taken is the responsibility of the credit control server that controls the prepaid subscriber.
If another entity working in conjunction with the Diameter Credit Control application already provisions the access device with all the required filter rules for the end user, the credit control server presumably need not send any additional filters.
Therefore, it is RECOMMENDED that credit control server implementations supporting graceful service termination be configurable for sending the Restriction Filter Rule AVP, the Filter Rule AVP, the Filter Id AVP, or none of the above.
When the final granted units have been consumed, the credit control client MUST perform an intermediate interrogation.
The credit control client and the credit control server process this intermediate interrogation and execute subsequent procedures, as specified in Section 5.6.2.
The credit control server may initiate graceful service termination when replying with the action RESTRICT ACCESS for the first interrogation.
This is similar to the behavior specified in Section 5.6.2.
Usage of the Server Initiated Credit Re authorization
Once the subscriber replenishes the account, they presumably expect all the restrictions applied by the graceful service termination procedure to be removed immediately and unlimited service access to be resumed.
For the best user experience, the credit control server implementation MAY support the server initiated credit re authorization (see Section 5.5).
In such a case, upon the successful account top up, the credit control server sends the Re Auth Request (RAR) message to solicit the credit re authorization.
The credit control client initiates the credit re authorization by sending the Credit Control Request message with the CC Request Type AVP set to the value UPDATE REQUEST.
The Used Service Unit AVP is not included in the request, as there is no allotted quota to report.
The Requested Service Unit AVP MAY be included in the request.
After the credit control client successfully receives the Credit Control  Answer with a new Granted Service Unit AVP, all the possible restrictions activated for the purpose of graceful service termination MUST be removed in the Service Element.
The credit control session and the service session continue as usual.
The CCFH, as described in this section, determines the behavior of the credit control client in fault situations.
The CCFH may be (1) received from the Diameter home AAA server, (2) received from the credit control server, or (3) configured locally.
The CCFH value received from the home AAA server overrides the locally configured value.
The CCFH value received from the credit control server in the Credit Control Answer message always overrides any existing values.
The authorization server MAY include the Accounting Realtime Required AVP to determine what to do if the sending of accounting records to the accounting server has been temporarily prevented, as defined in [RFC6733].
It is RECOMMENDED that the client complement the credit control failure procedures with a backup accounting flow toward an accounting server.
By using different combinations of the Accounting Realtime Required AVP and the CCFH, different safety levels can be built.
For example, by choosing a CCFH equal to CONTINUE for the credit control flow and an Accounting Realtime  Required AVP equal to DELIVER AND GRANT for the accounting flow, the service can be granted to the end user even if the connection to the credit control server is down, as long as the accounting server is able to collect the accounting information and information exchange is taking place between the accounting server and credit control server.
As the credit control application is based on real time bidirectional communication between the credit control client and the credit control server, the usage of alternative destinations and the buffering of messages may not be sufficient in the event of communication failures.
Because the credit control server has to maintain session states, moving the credit control message stream to a backup server requires a complex context transfer solution.
Whether the credit control message stream is moved to a backup credit control server during an ongoing credit control session depends on the value of the CC Session Failover AVP.
However, failover may occur at any point in the path between the credit control client and the credit control server if a transport failure is detected with a peer, as described in [RFC6733].
As a consequence, the credit control server might receive duplicate messages.
These duplicate or out of sequence messages can be detected in the credit control server based on the credit control server session state machine (Section 7), Session Id AVP, and CC Request Number AVP.
If a failure occurs during an ongoing credit control session, the credit control client may move the credit control message stream to an alternative server if the credit control server indicated FAILOVER SUPPORTED in the CC Session Failover AVP.
A secondary credit control server name, either received from the home Diameter AAA server or configured locally, can be used as an address of the backup server.
If the CC Session Failover AVP is set to FAILOVER NOT SUPPORTED, the credit control message stream MUST NOT be moved to a backup server.
For new credit control sessions, failover to an alternative credit control server SHOULD be performed, if possible.
For instance, if an implementation of the credit control client can determine primary credit control server unavailability, it can establish the new credit control sessions with a possibly available secondary credit control server.
The AAA transport profile [RFC3539] defines an application layer watchdog algorithm that enables failover from a peer that has failed and is controlled by a watchdog timer (Tw) (defined in [RFC3539]).
The recommended default initial value for Tw (Twinit) is 30 seconds.
Twinit may be set as low as 6 seconds; however, according to [RFC3539], setting too low a value for Twinit is likely to result in an increased probability of duplicates, as well as an increase in spurious failover and failback attempts.
The Diameter base protocol [RFC6733] is common to several different types of Diameter AAA applications that may be run in the same Service Element.
Therefore, tuning the timer for Twinit to a lower value in order to satisfy the requirements of real time applications, such as the Diameter Credit Control application, will certainly cause the above mentioned problems.
For prepaid services, however, the end user expects an answer from the network in a reasonable time.
Thus, the Diameter Credit Control client will react more quickly than would the underlying base protocol.
Therefore, this specification defines the Tx timer (as defined in Section 13), which is used by the credit control client to supervise communication with the credit control server.
When the Tx timer elapses, the credit control client takes action for the end user according to the CCFH.
When the Tx timer expires, the Diameter Credit Control client always terminates the service if the CCFH is set to the value TERMINATE.
The credit control session may be moved to an alternative server only if a protocol error DIAMETER TOO BUSY or DIAMETER UNABLE TO DELIVER
is received before the Tx timer expires.
Therefore, the value TERMINATE is not appropriate if proper failover behavior is desired.
If the CCFH is set to the value CONTINUE or RETRY AND TERMINATE, the service will be granted to the end user when the Tx timer expires.
An Answer message with granted units may arrive later if the base protocol transport failover occurred in the path to the credit control server.
(The Twinit default value is 3 times more than the recommended Tx timeout value.)
The credit control client SHOULD grant the service to the end user, start monitoring resource usage, and wait for the possible late answer until the timeout of the request (e.g., 120 seconds).
If the request fails and the CC Session
Failover AVP is set to FAILOVER
NOT SUPPORTED, the credit control client terminates or continues the service   depending on the value set in the CCFH   and MUST free all the reserved resources for the credit control session.
If the protocol error DIAMETER UNABLE TO DELIVER or DIAMETER
TOO BUSY is received or the request times out and the CC Session
Failover AVP is set to FAILOVER SUPPORTED, the credit control client MAY send the request to a backup server, if possible.
If the credit control client receives a successful answer from the backup server, it continues the credit control session with such a server.
If the retransmitted request also fails, the credit control client terminates or continues the service   depending on the value set in the CCFH   and MUST free all the reserved resources for the credit control session.
If a communication failure occurs during the graceful service termination procedure, the Service Element SHOULD always terminate the ongoing service session.
If the credit control server detects a failure during an ongoing credit control session, it will terminate the credit control session and return the reserved units back to the end user's account.
The supervision session timer Tcc (as defined in Section 13) is used in the credit control server to supervise the credit control session.
In order to support failover between credit control servers, information transfer about the credit control session and account state SHOULD take place between the primary and secondary credit control servers.
Implementations supporting credit control session failover MUST also ensure proper detection of duplicate or out of sequence messages.
Communication between the servers is regarded as an implementation issue and is outside the scope of this specification.
The one time event is used when there is no need to maintain any state in the Diameter Credit Control server   for example, inquiring about the price of the service.
The use of a one time event implies that the user has been authenticated and authorized beforehand.
The one time event can be used when the credit control client wants to know the cost of the service event or to check the account balance without any credit reservations.
It can also be used for refunding service units on the user's account or for direct debiting without any credit reservations.
The one time event is shown in Figure 8.
In environments such as the 3GPP architecture, the one time event can be sent from the Service Element directly to the credit control server.
The credit control client may need to know the price of the service event.
Services offered by application service providers whose prices are not known in the credit control client might exist.
The end user might also want to get an estimate of the price of a service event before requesting it.
A Diameter Credit Control client requesting the cost information MUST set the CC Request Type AVP equal to EVENT REQUEST, include the Requested Action AVP set to PRICE ENQUIRY, and set the requested service event information in the Service Identifier AVP in the Credit Control Request message.
Additional service event information may be sent as service specific AVPs or within the Service Parameter  Info AVP.
AVP indicates the service specific document applicable to the request.
The credit control server calculates the cost of the requested service event, but it does not perform any account balance checks or credit reservations from the account.
The estimated cost of the requested service event is returned to the credit control client in the Cost Information AVP in the Credit Control Answer message.
The Diameter Credit Control client may only have to verify that the end user's account balance covers the cost of a certain service without reserving any units from the account at the time of the inquiry.
This method does not guarantee that credit would be left when the Diameter Credit Control client requests the debiting of the account with a separate request.
A Diameter Credit Control client requesting a balance check MUST set the CC Request Type AVP equal to EVENT REQUEST, include a Requested  Action AVP set to CHECK BALANCE, and include the Subscription Id AVP or Subscription Id Extension AVP in order to identify the end user in the credit control server.
AVP indicates the service specific document applicable to the request.
The credit control server makes the balance check, but it does not make any credit reservations from the account.
The result of the balance check (ENOUGH CREDIT/NO CREDIT) is returned to the credit control client in the Check Balance Result AVP in the Credit Control Answer message.
There are certain service events for which service execution is always successful in the service environment.
The delay between the service invocation and the actual service delivery to the end user can be sufficiently long that the use of session based credit control would lead to unreasonably long credit control sessions.
In these cases, the Diameter Credit Control client can use the one time event scenario for direct debiting.
The Diameter Credit Control client SHOULD be sure that the requested service event execution would be successful when this scenario is used.
In the Credit Control Request message, the CC Request Type AVP is set to the value EVENT REQUEST and the Requested Action AVP is set to DIRECT DEBITING.
Extension AVP SHOULD be included to identify the end user in the credit control server.
The Event Timestamp AVP SHOULD be included in the request and contain the time when the service event is requested in the Service Element.
AVP indicates the service specific document applicable to the request.
If it knows the cost of the service event, the Diameter Credit Control client MAY include in the Requested Service Unit AVP the monetary amount to be charged.
If the Diameter Credit Control client does not know the cost of the service event, the Requested  Service Unit AVP MAY contain the number of requested service events.
The Service Identifier AVP always indicates the service concerned.
Additional service event information to be rated MAY be sent as service specific AVPs or within the Service Parameter Info AVP.
The credit control server SHOULD rate the service event and deduct the corresponding monetary amount from the end user's account.
If the type of the Requested Service Unit AVP is "money", no rating is needed, but the corresponding monetary amount is deducted from the end user's account.
The credit control server returns the Granted Service Unit AVP in the Credit Control Answer message to the Diameter Credit Control client.
The Granted Service Unit AVP contains the amount of service units that the Diameter Credit Control client can provide to the end user.
The type of the Granted Service Unit can be time, volume, service  specific, or money, depending on the type of service event.
If the credit control server determines that no credit control is needed for the service, it can include the result code indicating that the credit control is not applicable (e.g., the service is free of charge).
For informative purposes, the Credit Control Answer message MAY also include the Cost Information AVP containing the estimated total cost of the requested service.
Some services may refund service units to the end user's account   for example, gaming services.
The credit control client MUST set the CC Request Type AVP to the value EVENT REQUEST and the Requested Action AVP to REFUND ACCOUNT in the Credit Control Request message.
AVP or Subscription Id Extension AVP SHOULD be included to identify the end user in the credit control server.
AVP indicates the service specific document applicable to the request.
The Diameter Credit Control client MAY include the monetary amount to be refunded in the Requested Service Unit AVP.
The Service  Identifier AVP always indicates the service concerned.
If the Diameter Credit Control client does not know the monetary amount to be refunded, in addition to the Service Identifier AVP it MAY send service specific AVPs or the Service Parameter Info AVP containing additional service event information to be rated.
For informative purposes, the Credit Control Answer message MAY also include the Cost Information AVP containing the estimated monetary amount of refunded units.
Failure Procedure Failover to an alternative credit control server is allowed for a one time event, as the server is not maintaining session states.
For instance, if the credit control client receives a protocol error DIAMETER UNABLE TO DELIVER or DIAMETER
TOO BUSY, it can resend the request to an alternative server, if possible.
transparent Diameter relays and redirect agents or Diameter Credit Control proxies between the credit control client and credit control server.
Failover may occur at any point in the path between the credit control client and the credit control server if a transport failure is detected with a peer, as described in [RFC6733].
Because there can be duplicate requests for various reasons, the credit control server is responsible for real time duplicate detection.
Implementation issues for duplicate detection are discussed in [RFC6733], Appendix C.
When the credit control client detects a communication failure with the credit control server, its behavior depends on the requested action.
The Tx timer (as defined in Section 13) is used in the credit control client to supervise communication with the credit control server.
If the requested action is PRICE ENQUIRY or CHECK BALANCE and a communication failure is detected, the credit control client SHOULD forward the request messages to an alternative credit control server, if possible.
The secondary credit control server name, if received from the home Diameter AAA server, can be used as an address of the backup server.
If the requested action is DIRECT DEBITING, the DDFH controls the credit control client's behavior.
The DDFH may be received from the home Diameter AAA server or may be locally configured.
The credit control server may also send the DDFH in any CCA messages to be used for direct debiting events compiled thereafter.
The DDFH value received from the home Diameter AAA server overrides the locally configured value, and the DDFH value received from the credit control server in a Credit Control Answer message always overrides any existing values.
If the DDFH is set to TERMINATE OR BUFFER, the credit control client SHOULD NOT grant the service if, after a possible retransmission attempt to an alternative credit control server, the credit control client can eventually determine from the result code or error code in the Answer message that units have not been debited.
Otherwise, the credit control client SHOULD grant the service to the end user and store the request in credit control application level non volatile storage.
(Note that resending the request at a later time is not a guarantee that the service will be debited, as the user's account may be empty when the server successfully processes the request.)
The credit control client MUST mark these request messages as possible duplicates by setting the T flag in the command header as described in [RFC6733], Section 3.
If the DDFH is set to CONTINUE, the service SHOULD be granted, even if credit control messages cannot be delivered and messages are not buffered.
If the Tx timer expires, the credit control client MUST continue the service and wait for a possible late answer.
If the request times out, the credit control client retransmits the request (marked with the T flag) to a backup credit control server, if possible.
If the retransmitted request also times out or if a temporary error is received in answer, the credit control client buffers the request if the value of the DDFH is set to TERMINATE OR BUFFER.
If a failed answer is received for the retransmitted request, the credit control client frees all the resources reserved for the event message and deletes the request regardless of the value of the DDFH.
The Credit Control Request with the requested action REFUND ACCOUNT should always be stored in credit control application level non volatile storage in case a temporary failure occurs.
The credit control client MUST mark the retransmitted request message as a possible duplicate by setting the T flag in the command header as described in [RFC6733], Section 3.
For stored requests, the implementation may choose to limit the number of retransmission attempts and to define a retransmission interval.
Note that only one entity in the credit control system SHOULD be responsible for duplicate detection.
If there is only one credit control server within the given realm, the credit control server may perform duplicate detection.
If there is more than one credit control server in a given realm, only one entity in the credit control system should be responsible, to ensure that the end user's account is not debited or credited multiple times for the same service event.
Credit Control Application State Machines
This section defines five credit control application state machines.
The first four state machines are to be observed by credit control clients.
The first state machine describes session based credit control where the first interrogation is executed as part of the authorization/ authentication process.
The second state machine describes session based credit control where the first interrogation is executed after the authorization/authentication process.
The requirements regarding what has to be supported for these two state machines are discussed in Section 5.2.
The third state machine describes session based credit control for the intermediate and final interrogations.
The fourth state machine describes event based credit control.
These two state machines are to be observed by all implementations that conform to this specification.
The fifth state machine describes the credit control session from a credit control server's perspective.
Any event not listed in the state machines MUST be considered an error condition, and a corresponding answer, if applicable, MUST be returned to the originator of the message.
In Tables 3, 4, and 5, the event "failure to send" means that the Diameter Credit Control client is unable to communicate with the desired destination or, if a failover procedure is supported, with a possibly defined alternative destination (e.g., the request times out and the Answer message is not received).
This could be due to (1)
the peer being down or (2) a physical link failure in the path to or from the credit control server.
The event "temporary error" means that the Diameter Credit Control client received a protocol error notification (DIAMETER TOO BUSY, DIAMETER UNABLE TO DELIVER, or DIAMETER LOOP DETECTED) in the Result Code AVP of the Credit Control Answer command.
This type of notification may ultimately be received in answer to the retransmitted request to a defined alternative destination, if failover is supported.
The event "failed answer" means that the Diameter Credit Control client received a non transient failure (permanent failure)
notification in the Credit Control Answer command.
This type of notification may ultimately be received in answer to the retransmitted request to a defined alternative destination, if failover is supported.
The action "store request" means that a request is stored in credit control application level non volatile storage.
The event "not successfully processed" means that the credit control server could not process the message, e.g., due to an unknown end user, an account being empty, or errors defined in [RFC6733].
The event "user service terminated" can be triggered for various reasons, e.g., normal user termination, network failure, and ASR (Abort Session Request).
The Termination Cause AVP contains information about the reason for termination, as specified in [RFC6733].
The Tx timer, which is used to control the waiting time in the credit control client in the Pending state, is stopped upon exit of the Pending state.
The stopping of the Tx timer is omitted in the state machine when the new state is Idle, as moving to Idle state implies the clearing of the session and all the variables associated to it.
The states PendingI, PendingU, PendingT, PendingE, and PendingB stand for pending states to wait for an answer to a credit control request related to Initial, Update, Termination, Event, or Buffered request, respectively.
In Table 2, failover to a secondary server upon "temporary error" or "failure to send" is not explicitly described.
However, moving an ongoing credit control message stream to an alternative server is possible if the CC Session Failover AVP is set to FAILOVER SUPPORTED, as described in Section 5.7.
Resending a credit control event to an alternative server is supported as described in Section 6.5.
Failure to send or Tx timer
Open    CC termination request   Send CC termin.
Open    CC termination request   Send CC termin.
Session Based and Event Based Server State Machine 8.
This section defines the Credit Control AVPs that are specific to the Diameter Credit Control application and that MAY be included in the Diameter Credit Control messages.
The AVPs defined in this section
MAY also be included in authorization commands defined in authorization specific applications, such as [RFC7155] and [RFC4004], if the first interrogation is performed as part of the authorization/ authentication process, as described in Section 5.2.
The Diameter AVP rules are defined in [RFC6733], Section 4.
These AVP rules are observed in AVPs defined in this section.
The following table describes the Diameter AVPs defined in the credit control application, their AVP Code values, types, and possible flag values.
The AVP Flag rules ('M', 'V') are explained in [RFC6733], Section 4.1.
V   Redirect Server Extension 665   8.64
AVP (AVP Code 411) is of type OctetString and contains information to correlate credit control requests generated for different components of the service, e.g., transport and service level.
Whoever allocates the Service Context
(i.e., a unique identifier of a service specific document) is also responsible for defining the content and encoding of the CC Correlation Id AVP.
The CC Request Number AVP (AVP Code 415) is of type Unsigned32 and identifies this request within one session.
Id AVPs are globally unique, the combination of the Session
Id AVP and the CC Request Number AVP is also globally unique and can be used in matching credit control messages with confirmations.
An easy way to produce unique numbers is to set the value of the CC Request Number AVP to 0 for a credit control request with a CC Request Type AVP of INITIAL REQUEST (the initial request in a session).
The value of the CC Request Number AVP should be set to 1 for the first UPDATE REQUEST, to 2 for the second, and so on until the value for TERMINATION REQUEST is one more than the value for the last UPDATE REQUEST.
In the case of event charging (when the CC Request  Type AVP has the value EVENT REQUEST), the CC Request Number AVP should be set to 0 for a credit control request.
The CC Request Type AVP (AVP Code 416) is of type Enumerated and contains the reason for sending the Credit Control Request message.
It MUST be present in all Credit Control Request messages.
The following values are defined for the CC Request Type AVP (the value of 0 (zero) is reserved):
This request is used to initiate a credit control session.
It contains credit control information that is relevant to the initiation.
This request contains credit control information for an existing credit control session.
Credit control requests of this type SHOULD be sent every time a credit control re authorization is needed at the expiry of the allocated quota or validity time.
Further, additional service specific events MAY trigger a spontaneous UPDATE REQUEST.
This request is sent to terminate a credit control session.
It contains credit control information relevant to the existing session.
This request is used when there is no need to maintain any credit control session state in the credit control server.
It contains all information relevant to the service and is the only request of the service.
The reason for this request is further detailed in the Requested Action AVP.
The Requested Action AVP MUST be included in the Credit Control Request message when CC Request  Type is set to EVENT REQUEST.
The CC Session Failover AVP (AVP Code 418) is of type Enumerated and contains information as to whether moving the credit control message stream to a backup server during an ongoing credit control session is supported.
In the case of communication failures, the credit control message streams can be moved to an alternative destination if the credit control server supports failover to an alternative server.
The secondary credit control server name, if received from the home Diameter AAA server, can be used as an address of the backup server.
An implementation is not required to support moving a credit control message stream to an alternative server, as this also requires moving information related to the credit control session to the backup server.
The following values are defined for the CC Session Failover AVP: FAILOVER NOT SUPPORTED   0
Failover AVP is set to FAILOVER
NOT SUPPORTED, the credit control message stream MUST NOT be moved to an alternative destination in the case of a communication failure.
This is the default behavior if the AVP isn't included in the reply from the authorization or credit control server.
Failover AVP is set to FAILOVER SUPPORTED, the credit control message stream SHOULD be moved to an alternative destination in the case of a communication failure.
Moving the credit control message stream to a backup server MAY require that information related to the credit control session should also be forwarded to an alternative server.
AVP (AVP Code 419) is of type Unsigned64 and contains the credit control sub session identifier.
The combination of the Session
this AVP MUST be unique per sub session, and the value of this AVP MUST be monotonically increased by one for all new sub sessions.
The absence of this AVP implies that no sub sessions are in use.
The Check Balance Result AVP (AVP Code 422) is of type Enumerated and contains the result of the balance check.
This AVP is applicable only when the Requested Action AVP indicates CHECK BALANCE in the Credit Control Request command.
The following values are defined for the Check Balance Result AVP:
There is enough credit in the account to cover the requested service.
There isn't enough credit in the account to cover the requested service.
The Cost Information AVP (AVP Code 423) is of type Grouped, and it is used to return the cost information of a service, which the credit control client can transfer transparently to the end user.
The included Unit Value AVP contains the cost estimate (always of type "money") of the service in the case of price inquiries, or the accumulated cost estimation in the case of a credit control session.
The Currency Code AVP specifies in which currency the cost was given.
The Cost Unit AVP specifies the unit when the service cost is a cost per unit (e.g., cost for the service is $1 per minute).
When the Requested Action AVP with the value PRICE ENQUIRY is included in the Credit Control Request command, the Cost Information AVP sent in the succeeding Credit Control Answer command contains the cost estimation for the requested service, without any reservations being made.
The Cost Information AVP included in the Credit Control Answer command with the CC Request Type set to UPDATE REQUEST
contains the accumulated cost estimation for the session, without taking any credit reservations into account.
The Cost Information AVP included in the Credit Control Answer command with the CC Request Type set to EVENT REQUEST or TERMINATION REQUEST
contains the estimated total cost for the requested service.
The Cost Information AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733]):
The Unit Value AVP is of type Grouped (AVP Code 445) and specifies the cost as a floating point value.
The Unit Value is a significand with an exponent
; i.e., Unit Value   Value
This representation avoids unwanted rounding off.
For example, the value of 2,3 is represented as Value Digits   23 and Exponent    1.
The absence of the exponent part MUST be interpreted as an exponent equal to zero.
The Unit Value AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733]):
The Exponent AVP is of type Integer32
(AVP Code 429) and contains the exponent value to be applied for the Value Digits AVP within the Unit Value AVP. 8.10.
Digits AVP is of type Integer64
(AVP Code 447) and contains the significant digits of the number.
If decimal values are needed to present the units, the scaling MUST be indicated with the related Exponent AVP.
For example, for the monetary amount $0.05, the value of the Value Digits AVP MUST be set to 5, and the scaling MUST be indicated with the Exponent AVP set to  2. 8.11.
The Currency Code AVP (AVP Code 425) is of type Unsigned32 and contains a currency code that specifies in which currency the values of AVPs containing monetary units were given.
It is specified by using the numeric values defined in the ISO 4217 standard [ISO4217].
Cost Unit AVP The Cost Unit AVP (AVP Code 424) is of type UTF8String, and it is used to display a human readable string to the end user.
It specifies the applicable unit to the Cost Information AVP when the service cost is a cost per unit (e.g., cost of the service is $1 per minute).
The Cost Unit setting can be minutes, hours, days, kilobytes, megabytes, etc.
The Credit Control AVP (AVP Code 426) is of type Enumerated and MUST be included in AA Request messages when the Service Element has credit control capabilities.
The following values are defined for the Credit Control AVP: CREDIT AUTHORIZATION
If the home Diameter AAA server determines that the user has a prepaid subscription, this value indicates that the credit control server MUST be contacted to perform the first interrogation.
The value of the Credit Control AVP MUST always be set to 0 in an AA Request sent to perform the first interrogation and to initiate a new credit control session.
This value indicates to the Diameter AAA server that a credit control session is ongoing for the subscriber and that the credit control server MUST NOT be contacted.
The Credit Control AVP set to the value of 1
is to be used only when the first interrogation has been successfully performed and the credit control session is ongoing (i.e., re authorization triggered by authorization lifetime).
This value MUST NOT be used in an AA Request sent to perform the first interrogation.
Credit Control Failure Handling AVP (CCFH)
The CCFH (AVP Code 427) is of type Enumerated.
The credit control client uses information in this AVP to decide what to do if sending credit control messages to the credit control server has been, for instance, temporarily prevented due to a network problem.
Depending on the service logic, the credit control server can order the client to terminate the service immediately when there is a reason to believe that the service cannot be charged, or to try failover to an alternative server, if possible.
The server could then either terminate or grant the service, should the alternative connection also fail.
The following values are defined for the CCFH:
When the CCFH is set to TERMINATE, the service MUST only be granted for as long as there is a connection to the credit control server.
If the credit control client does not receive any Credit Control  Answer messages before the Tx timer (as defined in Section 13) expires, the credit control request is regarded as failed, and the end user's service session is terminated.
This is the default behavior if the AVP isn't included in the reply from the authorization or credit control server.
When the CCFH is set to CONTINUE, the credit control client SHOULD resend the request to an alternative server in the case of transport or temporary failures, provided that (1) a failover procedure is supported in the credit control server and the credit control client and (2)
an alternative server is available.
Otherwise, the service SHOULD be granted, even if credit control messages can't be delivered.
When the CCFH is set to RETRY AND TERMINATE, the credit control client SHOULD resend the request to an alternative server in the case of transport or temporary failures, provided that (1) a failover procedure is supported in the credit control server and the credit control client and (2)
an alternative server is available.
Otherwise, the service SHOULD NOT be granted when the credit control messages can't be delivered.
Direct Debiting Failure Handling AVP (DDFH)
The DDFH (AVP Code 428) is of type Enumerated.
The credit control client uses information in this AVP to decide what to do if sending credit control messages (Requested Action AVP set to DIRECT DEBITING) to the credit control server has been, for instance, temporarily prevented due to a network problem.
The following values are defined for the DDFH:
When the DDFH is set to TERMINATE OR BUFFER, the service MUST be granted for as long as there is a connection to the credit control server.
If the credit control client does not receive any Credit Control Answer messages before the Tx timer (as defined in Section 13)
expires, the credit control request is regarded as failed.
The client SHOULD terminate the service if it can determine from the failed answer that units have not been debited.
Otherwise, the credit control client SHOULD grant the service, store the request in application level non volatile storage, and try to resend the request.
These requests MUST be marked as possible duplicates by setting the T flag in the command header as described in [RFC6733], Section 3.
This is the default behavior if the AVP isn't included in the reply from the authorization server.
When the DDFH is set to CONTINUE, the service SHOULD be granted, even if credit control messages can't be delivered, and the request should be deleted.
Multiple Services Credit Control AVP
The Multiple Services Credit Control AVP (AVP Code 456) is of type Grouped and contains the AVPs related to the independent credit control of multiple services.
Note that each instance of this AVP carries units related to one or more services or related to a single rating group.
The Service Identifier AVP and the Rating Group AVP are used to associate the granted units to a given service or rating group.
If both the Service Identifier AVP and the Rating Group AVP are included, the target of the service units is always the service(s) indicated by the value of the Service Identifier AVP(s).
If only the Rating Group AVP is present, the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP relates to all the services that belong to the specified rating group.
The G S U Pool Reference AVP allows the server to specify a G S U Pool Identifier identifying a credit pool within which the units of the specified type are considered pooled.
If a G S U Pool  Reference AVP is present, then actual service units of the specified type MUST also be present.
For example, if the G S U Pool Reference AVP specifies a CC Unit Type value of TIME (Section 8.32), then the CC Time AVP MUST be present.
The Requested Service Unit AVP MAY contain the amount of requested service units or the requested monetary value.
It MUST be present in the initial interrogation and within the intermediate interrogations in which a new quota is requested.
If the credit control client does not include the Requested Service Unit AVP in a request command   because, for instance, it has determined that the end user terminated the service
the server MUST debit the used amount from the user's account but MUST NOT return a new quota in the corresponding answer.
The Validity Time, Result Code, and Final Unit Indication or QoS Final Unit Indication AVPs MAY be present in a Credit Control  Answer command as defined in Sections 5.1.2 and 5.6 for graceful service termination.
When both the Tariff Time Change AVP and the Tariff Change Usage AVP are present, the server MUST include two separate instances of the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP with the Granted Service Unit AVP associated to the same service identifier and/or rating group.
Where the two quotas are associated to the same pool or to different pools, the credit pooling mechanism defined in Section 5.1.2 applies.
When the client is reporting used units before and after the tariff time change, it MUST use the Tariff Change Usage AVP inside the Used Service Unit AVP.
A server not implementing the independent credit control of multiple services MUST treat the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP as an invalid AVP.
[ Requested Service Unit ]
[ Used Service Unit ]
Granted Service Unit AVP The Granted Service Unit AVP (AVP Code 431) is of type Grouped and contains the amount of units that the Diameter Credit Control client can provide to the end user until the service must be released or the new Credit Control Request must be sent.
A client is not required to implement all the unit types, and it must treat unknown or unsupported unit types in the Answer message as an incorrect CCA.
In this case, the client MUST terminate the credit control session and indicate the reason as DIAMETER BAD ANSWER in the Termination Cause AVP.
The Granted Service Unit AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733]):
[ Tariff Time Change ]
[ CC Input Octets ]
Requested Service Unit AVP The Requested Service Unit AVP (AVP Code 437) is of type Grouped and contains the amount of requested units specified by the Diameter Credit Control client.
A server is not required to implement all the unit types, and it must treat unknown or unsupported unit types as invalid AVPs.
The Requested Service Unit AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733]):
[ CC Input Octets ]
The Used Service Unit AVP is of type Grouped (AVP Code 446) and contains the amount of used units measured from the point when the service became active or, if interim interrogations are used during the session, from the point when the previous measurement ended.
The value reported in a Used Service Unit AVP is not necessarily related to the grant provided in a Granted Service Unit AVP, e.g., the value in this AVP may exceed the value in the grant.
The Used Service Unit AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733]): Used Service Unit ::
[ Tariff Change Usage ]
[ CC Input Octets ]
The Tariff Time Change AVP (AVP Code 451) is of type Time.
It is sent from the server to the client and includes the time in seconds since January 1, 1900, 00:00 UTC, when the tariff of the service will be changed.
The tariff change mechanism is optional for the client and server, and it is not used for time based services (Section 5).
If a client does not support the tariff time change mechanism, it MUST treat the Tariff Time Change AVP in the Answer message as an incorrect CCA.
In this case, the client terminates the credit control session and indicates the reason as DIAMETER BAD ANSWER in the Termination Cause AVP.
Omission of this AVP means that no tariff change is to be reported.
The CC Time AVP (AVP Code 420) is of type Unsigned32 and indicates the length of the requested, granted, or used time in seconds.
The CC Money AVP (AVP Code 413) is of type Grouped and specifies the monetary amount in the given currency.
The Currency Code AVP SHOULD be included.
The CC Money AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733]): CC Money ::
> { Unit Value }
[ Currency Code ] 8.23.
The CC Total Octets AVP (AVP Code 421) is of type Unsigned64 and contains the total number of requested, granted, or used octets regardless of the direction (sent or received).
The CC Input Octets AVP (AVP Code 412) is of type Unsigned64 and contains the number of requested, granted, or used octets that can be / have been received from the end user.
The CC Output Octets AVP (AVP Code 414) is of type Unsigned64 and contains the number of requested, granted, or used octets that can be / have been sent to the end user.
CC Service Specific Units AVP
The CC Service Specific Units AVP (AVP Code 417) is of type Unsigned64 and specifies the number of service specific units (e.g., number of events, points) given in a selected service.
The service  specific units always refer to the service identified in the Service  Identifier AVP (or Rating Group AVP when the Multiple Services  Credit Control AVP is used).
The Tariff Change Usage AVP (AVP Code 452) is of type Enumerated and defines whether units are used before or after a tariff change, or whether the units straddled a tariff change during the reporting period.
Omission of this AVP means that no tariff change has occurred.
In addition, when present in Answer messages as part of the Multiple  Services Credit Control AVP, this AVP defines whether units are allocated to be used before or after a tariff change event.
When the Tariff Time Change AVP is present, omission of this AVP in Answer messages means that the single quota mechanism applies.
Tariff Change Usage can be set to one of the following values: UNIT BEFORE TARIFF CHANGE   0
When present in the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP, this value indicates the amount of units allocated for use before a tariff change occurs.
When present in the Used Service Unit AVP, this value indicates the amount of resource units used before a tariff change had occurred.
When present in the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP, this value indicates the amount of units allocated for use after a tariff change occurs.
When present in the Used Service Unit AVP, this value indicates the amount of resource units used after a tariff change had occurred.
This value is to be used only in the Used Service Unit AVP and indicates the amount of resource units that straddle the tariff change (e.g., the metering process reports to the credit control client in blocks of n octets, and one block straddled the tariff change).
The Service Identifier AVP is of type Unsigned32
(AVP Code 439) and contains the identifier of a service.
The specific service the request relates to is uniquely identified by the combination of the Service Context
Id AVP and the Service Identifier AVP.
A usage example of this AVP is illustrated in Appendix A.9.
The Rating Group AVP is of type Unsigned32
(AVP Code 432) and contains the identifier of a rating group.
All the services subject to the same rating type are part of the same rating group.
The specific rating group the request relates to is uniquely identified by the combination of the Service Context
Id AVP and the Rating Group AVP.
A usage example of this AVP is illustrated in Appendix A.9.
G S U Pool Reference AVP
The G S U Pool Reference AVP (AVP Code 457) is of type Grouped.
It is used in the Credit Control Answer message and associates the Granted Service Unit AVP within which it appears with a credit pool within the session.
The G S U Pool Identifier AVP specifies the credit pool from which credit is drawn for this unit type.
The CC Unit Type AVP specifies the type of units for which credit is pooled.
The Unit Value AVP specifies the multiplier, which converts between service units of type CC Unit Type and abstract service units within the credit pool (and thus to service units of any other services or rating groups associated with the same pool).
G S U Pool Identifier AVP
The G S U Pool Identifier AVP (AVP Code 453) is of type Unsigned32 and identifies a credit pool within the session.
The CC Unit Type AVP (AVP Code 454) is of type Enumerated and specifies the type of units considered to be pooled into a credit pool.
The following values are defined for the CC Unit Type AVP:
The Validity Time AVP is of type Unsigned32
It is sent from the credit control server to the credit control client.
The Validity Time AVP contains the validity time of the granted service units.
The measurement of the Validity Time is started upon receipt of the Credit Control Answer message containing this AVP.
If the granted service units have not been consumed within the validity time specified in this AVP, the credit control client MUST send a Credit Control Request message to the server, with CC Request Type set to UPDATE REQUEST.
The value field of the Validity Time AVP is given in seconds.
The Validity Time AVP is also used for graceful service termination (see Section 5.6) to indicate to the credit control client how long the subscriber is allowed to use network resources after the specified action (i.e., REDIRECT or RESTRICT ACCESS) started.
When the Validity Time elapses, a new intermediate interrogation is sent to the server.
The Final Unit Indication AVP (AVP Code 430) is of type Grouped and indicates that the Granted Service Unit AVP in the Credit Control  Answer or in the AA Answer contains the final units for the service.
After these units have expired, the Diameter Credit Control client is responsible for executing the action indicated in the Final Unit  Action AVP (see Section 5.6).
If more than one unit type is received in the Credit Control Answer, the unit type that first expired SHOULD cause the credit control client to execute the specified action.
In the first interrogation, the Final Unit Indication AVP with Final Unit Action set to REDIRECT or RESTRICT ACCESS can also be present with no Granted Service Unit AVP in the Credit Control Answer or in the AA Answer.
This indicates to the Diameter Credit Control client that the client is to execute the specified action immediately.
If the home service provider policy is to terminate the service, naturally, the server SHOULD return the appropriate transient failure (see Section 9.1) in order to implement the policy  defined action.
The Final Unit Action AVP defines the behavior of the Service Element when the user's account cannot cover the cost of the service and MUST always be present if the Final Unit Indication AVP is included in a command.
If the Final Unit Action AVP is set to TERMINATE, the Final Unit  Indication group AVP MUST NOT contain any other AVPs.
If the Final Unit Action AVP is set to REDIRECT, the Redirect Server AVP or the Redirect Server Extension AVP (at least one) MUST be present.
The Restriction Filter Rule AVP or the Filter
AVP MAY be present in the Credit Control Answer message if the user is also allowed to access other services that are not accessible through the address given in the Redirect Server AVP.
If the Final Unit Action AVP is set to RESTRICT ACCESS, either the Restriction Filter Rule AVP or the Filter
AVP is defined in [RFC7155].
Id AVP can be used to reference an IP filter list installed in the access device by means other than the Diameter Credit Control application, e.g., locally configured or configured by another entity.
If the Final Unit Action AVP is set to REDIRECT and the type of server is not one of the enumerations in the Redirect Address Type AVP, then the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP SHOULD be used together with the Redirect Server Extension AVP instead of the Final Unit  Indication AVP.
If the Final Unit Action AVP is set to RESTRICT ACCESS or REDIRECT and the classification of the restricted traffic cannot be expressed using an IPFilterRule, or if actions (e.g., QoS) other than just allowing traffic need to be enforced, then the QoS Final Unit  Indication AVP SHOULD be used instead of the Final Unit Indication AVP.
However, if the credit control server wants to preserve backward compatibility with credit control clients that support only [RFC4006], the Final Unit Indication AVP SHOULD be used together with
The Final Unit Indication AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733]): Final Unit Indication ::
> { Final Unit Action }
[ Restriction Filter Rule ]
[ Redirect Server ] 8.35.
The Final Unit Action AVP (AVP Code 449) is of type Enumerated and indicates to the credit control client the action to be taken when the user's account cannot cover the service cost.
Final Unit Action can be set to one of the following values:
The credit control client MUST terminate the service session.
This is the default handling, applicable whenever the credit control client receives an unsupported Final Unit Action value, and it MUST be supported by all the Diameter Credit Control client implementations conforming to this specification.
The Service Element MUST redirect the user to the address specified in the Redirect Server Address AVP or one of the AVPs included in the Redirect Server Extension AVP.
The redirect action is defined in Section 5.6.2.
The access device MUST restrict the user's access according to the filter AVPs contained in the applied Grouped AVP: according to IP packet filters defined in the Restriction Filter Rule AVP, according to the packet classifier filters defined in the Filter Rule AVP, or according to the packet filters identified by the Filter Id AVP.
All of the packets not matching any restriction filters (see Section 5.6.3)
The Restriction Filter Rule AVP (AVP Code 438) is of type IPFilterRule and provides filter rules corresponding to services that are to remain accessible even if there are no more service units granted.
The access device has to configure the specified filter rules for the subscriber and MUST drop all the packets not matching these filters.
Zero, one, or more such AVPs MAY be present in a Credit Control Answer message or in an AA Answer message.
The Redirect Server AVP (AVP Code 434) is of type Grouped and contains the address information of the redirect server (e.g., HTTP redirect server, SIP Server) with which the end user is to be connected when the account cannot cover the service cost.
It MUST be present when the Final Unit Action AVP is set to REDIRECT.
The Redirect Server AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733]): Redirect Server ::
The Redirect Address Type AVP (AVP Code 433) is of type Enumerated and defines the address type of the address given in the Redirect  Server Address AVP.
Redirect Address Type can be set to one of the following values: IPv4
The address type is in the form of a "dotted decimal" IPv4 address, as defined in [RFC791].
The address type is in the form of an IPv6 address, as defined in [RFC4291].
The address MUST conform to the textual representation of the address according to [RFC5952].
Because [RFC5952] is more restrictive than the "RFC 3513" format required by [RFC4006], some legacy implementations may not be compliant with the new requirements.
Accordingly, implementations receiving this AVP MAY be liberal in the textual IPv6 representations that are accepted, without raising an error.
The address type is in the form of a Uniform Resource Locator, as defined in [RFC3986].
The address type is in the form of a SIP Uniform Resource Identifier, as defined in [RFC3261].
The Redirect Server Address AVP (AVP Code 435) is of type UTF8String and defines the address of the redirect server (e.g., HTTP redirect server, SIP Server) with which the end user is to be connected when the account cannot cover the service cost. 8.40.
The Multiple Services Indicator AVP (AVP Code 455) is of type Enumerated and indicates whether the Diameter Credit Control client is capable of handling multiple services independently within a (sub )session.
The absence of this AVP means that independent credit control of multiple services is not supported.
A server not implementing the independent credit control of multiple services MUST treat the Multiple Services Indicator AVP as an invalid AVP.
The following values are defined for the Multiple Services Indicator AVP: MULTIPLE SERVICES NOT SUPPORTED   0
The client does not support independent credit control of multiple services within a (sub )session.
The client supports independent credit control of multiple services within a (sub )session.
The Requested Action AVP (AVP Code 436) is of type Enumerated and contains the requested action being sent in a Credit Control Request command where the CC Request Type is set to EVENT REQUEST.
The following values are defined for the Requested Action AVP:
This indicates a request to decrease the end user's account according to information specified in the Requested Service Unit AVP and/or Service Identifier AVP (additional rating information may be included in service specific AVPs or in the Service Parameter Info AVP).
The Granted Service Unit AVP in the Credit Control Answer command contains the debited units.
This indicates a request to increase the end user's account according to information specified in the Requested Service Unit AVP and/or Service Identifier AVP (additional rating information may be included in service specific AVPs or in the Service Parameter Info AVP).
The Granted Service Unit AVP in the Credit Control Answer command contains the refunded units.
This indicates a balance check request.
In this case, the checking of the account balance is done without any credit reservations from the account.
The Check Balance Result AVP in the Credit Control  Answer command contains the result of the balance check.
This indicates a price inquiry request.
In this case, neither checking of the account balance nor reservation from the account will be done; only the price of the service will be returned in the Cost Information AVP in the Credit Control Answer command.
AVP is of type UTF8String
(AVP Code 461) and contains a unique identifier of the Diameter Credit Control service  specific document (as defined in Section 4.1.2) that applies to the request.
This is an identifier allocated by the service provider, the Service Element manufacturer, or a standardization body, and MUST uniquely identify a given Diameter Credit Control service specific document.
The format of the Service Context
The Token is an arbitrary string of characters and digits.
"domain" represents the entity that allocated the Service Context Id.
It can be ietf.org, 3gpp.org, etc.
if the identifier is allocated by a standardization body, or it can be the Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) of the service provider (e.g., provider.example.com) or the vendor (e.g., vendor.example.com) if the identifier is allocated by a private entity.
This AVP SHOULD be placed as close to the Diameter header as possible.
Service specific documents that are for private use only (i.e., for one provider's own use, where no interoperability is deemed useful) may define private identifiers without a need for coordination.
However, when interoperability is desired, coordination of the identifiers via, for example, publication of an informational RFC is RECOMMENDED in order to make the Service Context
The Service Parameter Info AVP (AVP Code 440) is of type Grouped and contains service specific information used for price calculation or rating.
The Service Parameter Type AVP defines the service parameter type, and the Service Parameter Value AVP contains the parameter value.
The actual contents of these AVPs are not within the scope of this document and SHOULD be defined in another Diameter application, in standards written by other standardization bodies, or in service  specific documentation.
In the case of an unknown service request (e.g., unknown Service  Parameter Type), the corresponding Answer message MUST contain the error code DIAMETER RATING FAILED.
A Credit Control Answer message with this error MUST contain one or more Failed AVP AVPs containing the Service Parameter Info AVPs that caused the failure.
The Service Parameter Type AVP is of type Unsigned32
(AVP Code 441) and defines the type of the service event specific parameter
(e.g., it can be the end user location or service name).
The different parameters and their types are service specific, and the meanings of these parameters are not defined in this document.
Whoever allocates the Service Context
(i.e., a unique identifier of a service  specific document) is also responsible for assigning Service  Parameter Type values for the service and ensuring their uniqueness within the given service.
The Service Parameter Value AVP contains the value associated with the service parameter type.
The Service Parameter Value AVP is of type OctetString (AVP Code 442) and contains the value of the service parameter type.
AVP (AVP Code 443) is used to identify the end user's subscription and is of type Grouped.
Id Data AVP that holds the identifier and a Subscription
Type AVP that defines the identifier type.
AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733])
Id Type AVP (AVP Code 450) is of type Enumerated, and it is used to determine which type of identifier is carried by the Subscription
This specification defines the following subscription identifiers.
However, new Subscription Id Type values can be assigned by IANA as defined in Section 12.
A server MUST implement all the Subscription  Id Type values required to perform credit authorization for the services it supports, including possible future values.
Type values MUST be treated according to the 'M' flag rule, as defined in [RFC6733].
The identifier is in international E.164 format (e.g., MSISDN), according to the ITU T E.164 numbering plan defined in [E164] and [CE164].
The identifier is in IMSI format, according to the ITU T E.212 identification plan as defined in [E212] and [CE212].
The identifier is in the form of a SIP URI, as defined in [RFC3261].
The identifier is in the form of a Network Access Identifier, as defined in [RFC7542].
The identifier is a credit control server private identifier.
Id Data AVP (AVP Code 444) is used to identify the end user and is of type UTF8String.
Id Type AVP defines which type of identifier is used.
The User Equipment Info AVP (AVP Code 458) is of type Grouped and allows the credit control client to indicate the identity and capability of the terminal the subscriber is using for the connection to the network.
User Equipment Info Type AVP
The User Equipment Info Type AVP is of type Enumerated
(AVP Code 459) and defines the type of user equipment information contained in the User Equipment Info Value AVP.
This specification defines the following user equipment types.
However, new User Equipment Info Type values can be assigned by IANA as defined in Section 12.
The identifier contains the International Mobile Equipment Identifier and Software Version (IMEISV) in the IMEISV format according to 3GPP TS 23.003 [TGPPIMEI].
The 48 bit Media Access Control (MAC) address is formatted as described in Section 3.21 of [RFC3580].
The 64 bit identifier used to identify the hardware instance of the product, as defined in [EUI64].
There are a number of types of terminals that have identifiers other than the International Mobile Equipment Identifier (IMEI), IEEE 802 MACs, or EUI 64.
These identifiers can be converted to modified EUI 64 format as described in [RFC4291] or by using some other methods referred to in the service specific documentation.
User Equipment Info Value AVP The User Equipment Info Value AVP (AVP Code 460) is of type OctetString.
The User Equipment Info Type AVP defines which type of identifier is used.
User Equipment Info Extension AVP The User Equipment Info Extension AVP (AVP Code 653) is of type Grouped and allows the credit control client to indicate the identity and capability of the terminal the subscriber is using for the connection to the network.
If the type of the equipment is one of the enumerated User Equipment Info Type AVP values, then the credit control client SHOULD send the information in the User Equipment Info AVP, in addition to or instead of the User Equipment Info Extension AVP.
This is done in order to preserve backward compatibility with credit control servers that support only [RFC4006].
Exactly one AVP MUST be included inside the User Equipment Info Extension AVP.
[ User Equipment Info ModifiedEUI64 ]
[ User Equipment Info IMEI ]
User Equipment Info IMEISV AVP The User Equipment Info IMEISV AVP
(AVP Code 654) is of type OctetString.
AVP contains the International Mobile Equipment Identifier and Software Version in the IMEISV format according to 3GPP TS 23.003 [TGPPIMEI].
User Equipment Info MAC AVP The User Equipment Info MAC AVP (AVP Code 655) is of type OctetString.
The User Equipment Info MAC AVP contains the 48 bit MAC address; the MAC address is formatted as described in Section 4.1.7.8 of [RFC5777].
AVP The User Equipment Info
AVP (AVP Code 656) is of type OctetString.
AVP contains the 64 bit identifier used to identify the hardware instance of the product, as defined in [EUI64].
ModifiedEUI64 AVP (AVP Code 657) is of type OctetString.
There are a number of types of terminals that have identifiers other than IMEI, IEEE 802 MACs, or EUI 64.
These identifiers can be converted to modified EUI 64 format as described in [RFC4291] or by using some other methods referred to in the service specific documentation.
User Equipment Info IMEI AVP
The User Equipment Info IMEI AVP (AVP Code 658) is of type OctetString.
The User Equipment Info IMEI AVP contains the International Mobile Equipment Identifier in the IMEI format according to 3GPP TS 23.003 [TGPPIMEI].
The Subscription Id Extension AVP (AVP Code 659) is used to identify the end user's subscription and is of type Grouped.
The Subscription Id Extension group AVP MUST include an AVP holding the subscription identifier.
The type of this included AVP indicates the type of the subscription identifier.
For each of the enumerated values of the Subscription
Type AVP, there is a corresponding sub AVP for use within the Subscription
If a new identifier type is required, a corresponding new sub AVP SHOULD be defined for use within the Subscription Id Extension group AVP.
If full backward compatibility with [RFC4006] is required, then the Subscription Id
AVP MUST be used to indicate identifier types enumerated in the Subscription
Id Type AVP, whereas the Subscription  Id Extension AVP MUST be used only for newly defined identifier types.
If full backward compatibility with [RFC4006] is not required, then the Subscription Id Extension AVP MAY be used to carry the existing identifier types.
In this case, the Subscription Id  Extension AVP MAY be sent together with the Subscription Id AVP.
Exactly one sub AVP MUST be included inside the Subscription
The Subscription Id Extension AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733])
: Subscription Id Extension ::
[ Subscription Id E164 ]
[ Subscription Id IMSI ]
[ Subscription Id SIP URI ]
[ Subscription Id NAI ]
E164 AVP (AVP Code 660) is of type UTF8String.
E164 AVP contains the international E.164 format (e.g., MSISDN), according to the ITU T E.164 numbering plan defined in [E164] and [CE164].
(AVP Code 661) is of type UTF8String.
IMSI AVP contains the IMSI format, according to the ITU T E.212 identification plan as defined in [E212] and [CE212]. 8.61.
SIP URI AVP (AVP Code 662) is of type UTF8String.
SIP URI AVP contains the identifier in the form of a SIP URI, as defined in [RFC3261].
Id NAI AVP (AVP Code 663) is of type UTF8String.
NAI AVP contains the identifier in the form of a Network Access Identifier, as defined in [RFC7542].
Private AVP (AVP Code 664) is of type UTF8String.
Private AVP contains a credit control server private identifier.
The Redirect Server Extension AVP (AVP Code 665) is of type Grouped and contains the address information of the redirect server (e.g., HTTP redirect server, SIP Server) with which the end user is to be connected when the account cannot cover the service cost.
It MUST be present inside the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP when the Final Unit  Action AVP is set to REDIRECT.
If the type of the redirect server is one of the enumerated values of the Redirect Address Type AVP, then the credit control server SHOULD send the information in the Redirect Server AVP, in addition to or instead of the Redirect  Server Extension AVP.
This is done in order to preserve backward compatibility with credit control clients that support only [RFC4006].
Exactly one AVP MUST be included inside the Redirect  Server Extension AVP.
The Redirect Server Extension AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733]): Redirect Server Extension ::
[ Redirect Address IPAddress ]
AVP (AVP Code 666) is of type Address and defines the IPv4 or IPv6 address of the redirect server with which the end user is to be connected when the account cannot cover the service cost.
When encoded as an IPv6 address in 16 bytes, the IPv4 mapped IPv6 format [RFC4291] MAY be used to indicate an IPv4 address.
The interpretation of Redirect Address IPAddress by the Diameter Credit Control client is a matter of local policy.
The Redirect Address URL AVP (AVP Code 667) is of type UTF8String and defines the address of the redirect server with which the end user is to be connected when the account cannot cover the service cost.
The address type is in the form of a Uniform Resource Locator, as defined in [RFC3986].
Note that individual URL schemes may restrict the contents of the UTF8String.
Redirect Address SIP URI AVP
The Redirect Address SIP URI AVP (AVP Code 668) is of type UTF8String and defines the address of the redirect server with which the end user is to be connected when the account cannot cover the service cost.
The address type is in the form of a SIP Uniform Resource Identifier, as defined in [RFC3261].
QoS Final Unit Indication AVP
The QoS Final Unit Indication AVP (AVP Code 669) is of type Grouped and indicates that the Granted Service Unit AVP in the Credit Control Answer or in the AA Answer contains the final units for the service.
After these units have expired, the Diameter Credit Control client is responsible for executing the action indicated in the Final Unit Action AVP (see Section 5.6).
If more than one unit type is received in the Credit Control Answer, the unit type that first expired SHOULD cause the credit control client to execute the specified action.
In the first interrogation, the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP with Final Unit Action set to REDIRECT or RESTRICT ACCESS can also be present with no Granted Service Unit AVP in the Credit Control Answer or in the AA Answer.
This indicates to the Diameter Credit Control client that the client is to execute the specified action immediately.
If the home service provider policy is to terminate the service, naturally, the server SHOULD return the appropriate transient failure (see Section 9.1) in order to implement the policy defined action.
The Final Unit Action AVP defines the behavior of the Service Element when the user's account cannot cover the cost of the service and MUST always be present if the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP is included in a command.
If the Final Unit Action AVP is set to TERMINATE, the QoS Final Unit  Indication group AVP MUST NOT contain any other AVPs.
If the Final Unit Action AVP is set to REDIRECT, then the Redirect  Server Extension AVP MUST be present.
The Filter Rule AVP or the Filter
AVP MAY be present in the Credit Control Answer message if the user is also allowed to access other services that are not accessible through the address given in the Redirect Server Extension AVP or if access to these services needs to be limited in some way (e.g., QoS).
If the Final Unit Action AVP is set to RESTRICT ACCESS, either the Filter Rule AVP or the Filter
The Filter Rule AVP is defined in [RFC5777].
The Filter Rule AVP can be used to define a specific combination of a condition and an action.
If used only with traffic conditions, it should define which traffic should be allowed when no more service units are granted.
However, if QoS or treatment information exists in the AVP, these actions should be executed, e.g., limiting the allowed traffic with certain QoS information.
When multiple Filter Rule AVPs exist, precedence should be determined as defined in [RFC5777].
AVP is defined in [RFC7155].
Id AVP can be used to reference an IP filter list installed in the access device by means other than the Diameter Credit Control application, e.g., locally configured or configured by another entity.
If the Final Unit Action AVP is (1) set to TERMINATE, (2) set to RESTRICT ACCESS and the action required is to allow only traffic that could be classified using an IPFilterRule, or (3) set to REDIRECT using a type that is one of the types in the Redirect Address Type AVP, then the credit control server SHOULD send the information in the Final Unit Indication AVP, in addition to or instead of the QoS Final Unit Indication AVP.
This is done in order to preserve backward compatibility with credit control clients that support only [RFC4006].
The QoS Final Unit Indication AVP is defined as follows (per grouped avp def as defined in [RFC6733]):
QoS Final Unit Indication ::
This section defines new Result Code AVP [RFC6733] values that must be supported by all Diameter implementations that conform to this specification.
The Credit Control Answer message includes the Result Code AVP, which may indicate that an error was present in the Credit Control Request message.
A rejected Credit Control Request message SHOULD cause the user's session to be terminated.
Transient Failures Errors that fall within the category of transient failures are used to inform the peer that the request could not be satisfied at the time it was received but that the request MAY be able to be satisfied in the future.
The credit control server denies the service request due to service restrictions.
If the CCR contained used service units, they are deducted, if possible.
DIAMETER CREDIT CONTROL NOT APPLICABLE   4011
The credit control server determines that the service can be granted to the end user but that no further credit control is needed for the service (e.g., the service is free of charge).
The credit control server denies the service request because the end user's account could not cover the requested service.
If the CCR contained used service units, they are deducted, if possible.
Permanent Failures Errors that fall within the category of permanent failures are used to inform the peer that the request failed and should not be attempted again.
The specified end user is unknown in the credit control server.
This error code is used to inform the credit control client that the credit control server cannot rate the service request due to insufficient rating input, an incorrect AVP combination, or an AVP or AVP value that is not recognized or supported in the rating.
The Failed AVP AVP MUST be included and contain (1)
a copy of the entire AVP or AVPs that could not be processed successfully or (2)
an example of the missing AVP, complete with the Vendor Id if applicable.
The value field of the missing AVP should be of correct minimum length and contain zeros.
The table in Section 10.1 presents the AVPs defined in this document and specifies in which Diameter messages they MAY or MUST NOT be present.
Note that AVPs that can only be present within a Grouped AVP are not represented in the table.
The table uses the following symbols: 0
The AVP MUST NOT be present in the message. 0
Zero or more instances of the AVP MAY be present in the message. 0
1   Zero or one instance of the AVP MAY be present in the message.
It is considered an error if there is more than one instance of the AVP.
One instance of the AVP MUST be present in the message.
The table in this section is used to represent which credit control application specific AVPs defined in this document are to be present in the credit control messages.
Re Auth Answer AVP Table
This section defines AVPs that are specific to the Diameter Credit Control application and that MAY be included in the Diameter Re Auth Request/Re Auth Answer (RAR/RAA) message [RFC6733].
RADIUS/Diameter Credit Control Interworking Model
This section defines the basic principles for the Diameter Credit Control / RADIUS prepaid interworking model
that is, a message translation between a RADIUS based prepaid solution and a Diameter Credit Control application.
A complete description of the protocol translations between RADIUS and the Diameter Credit Control application is beyond the scope of this specification and SHOULD be addressed in another appropriate document.
The Diameter Credit Control architecture may have a Translation Agent capable of translation between RADIUS prepaid and Diameter Credit Control protocols.
A AAA server (usually the home AAA server) may act as a Translation Agent and as a Diameter Credit Control client for Service Elements that use credit control mechanisms other than Diameter Credit Control   for instance, RADIUS prepaid.
In this case, the home AAA server contacts the Diameter Credit Control server as part of the authorization process.
The interworking architecture is illustrated in Figure 9, and an interworking flow is illustrated in Figure 10.
In a roaming situation, the Service Element (e.g., the NAS) may be located in the visited network, and a visited AAA server is usually contacted.
The visited AAA server then connects to the home AAA server.
Figure 9: Credit Control Architecture with Service Element Containing Translation Agent, Translating RADIUS
Prepaid to Diameter Credit Control Protocol
When the AAA server acting as a Translation Agent receives an initial RADIUS Access Request message from a Service Element (e.g., NAS access), it performs regular authentication and authorization.
If the RADIUS Access Request message indicates that the Service Element is capable of credit control and if the home AAA server finds that the subscriber is a prepaid subscriber, then a Diameter Credit Control Request SHOULD be sent toward the credit control server to perform credit authorization and to establish a credit control session.
After the Diameter Credit Control server checks the end user's account balance, rates the service, and reserves credit from the end user's account, the reserved quota is returned to the home AAA server in the Diameter Credit Control  Answer.
The home AAA server then sends the reserved quota to the Service Element in the RADIUS Access Accept.
At the expiry of the allocated quota, the Service Element sends a new RADIUS Access Request containing the units used thus far to the home AAA server.
The home AAA server shall map a RADIUS Access Request containing the reported units to the Diameter Credit Control server in a Diameter Credit Control Request (UPDATE REQUEST).
The Diameter Credit Control server debits the used units from the end user's account and allocates a new quota that is returned to the home AAA server in the Diameter Credit Control Answer.
The quota is transferred to the Service Element in the RADIUS Access Accept.
When the end user terminates the service or when the entire quota has been used, the Service Element sends a RADIUS Access Request.
To debit the used units from the end user's account and to stop the credit control session, the home AAA server sends a Diameter Credit Control Request (TERMINATION REQUEST) to the credit control server.
The Diameter Credit Control server acknowledges the session termination by sending a Diameter Credit Control Answer to the home AAA server.
The RADIUS Access Accept is sent to the NAS.
Figure 10 illustrates a Diameter Credit Control / RADIUS prepaid interworking sequence.
Message Flow Example with Diameter Credit Control
This document uses several registries that were originally created in [RFC4006] or the values assigned to existing namespaces managed by IANA.
IANA has updated these registries to reference this document.
The registries and their allocation policies are specified below.
This specification assigns the value 4, "Diameter Credit Control", to the "Application IDs" namespace defined in [RFC6733].
See Section 1.3 for more information.
This specification uses the value 272 from the "Command Codes" namespace defined in [RFC6733] for the Credit Control Request (CCR) and Credit Control Answer (CCA) commands.
AVP Codes See Section 8 for the assignments in this specification.
This document describes new AVP codes beyond those described in [RFC4006].
IANA has allocated codes for the AVPs listed in Table 7.
This specification assigns the values 4010, 4011, and 4012 in the "Result Code AVP Values (code 268)
Transient Failures" namespace and values 5030 and 5031 in the "Result Code AVP Values (code 268)
Permanent Failure" namespace, both of which were defined by [RFC6733].
See Section 9 for the assignments in this specification.
As defined in Section 8.3, the CC Request Type AVP includes Enumerated type values 1 4.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6.
As defined in Section 8.4, the CC Session Failover AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 1.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6.
As defined in Section 8.32, the CC Unit Type AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 5.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6.
As defined in Section 8.6, the Check Balance Result AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 1.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6.
As defined in Section 8.13, the Credit Control AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 1.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6. 12.10.
Credit Control Failure Handling AVP As defined in Section 8.14, the Credit Control Failure
Handling AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 2.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6. 12.11.
Direct Debiting Failure Handling AVP As defined in Section 8.15, the Direct Debiting Failure Handling AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 1.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6. 12.12.
As defined in Section 8.35, the Final Unit Action AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 2.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6. 12.13.
As defined in Section 8.40, the Multiple Services Indicator AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 1.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6. 12.14.
As defined in Section 8.38, the Redirect Address Type AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 3.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6. 12.15.
As defined in Section 8.41, the Requested Action AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 3.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6. 12.16.
As defined in Section 8.47, the Subscription Id Type AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 4.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6. 12.17.
As defined in Section 8.27, the Tariff Change Usage AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 2.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6.
User Equipment Info Type AVP
As defined in Section 8.50, the User Equipment Info Type AVP includes Enumerated type values 0 3.
IANA has created and is maintaining a namespace for this AVP.
The definition of new values is subject to the Specification Required policy [RFC8126] and conditions for enumerated values described in [RFC7423], Section 5.6. 13.
Parameters Related to the Credit Control Application Tx timer When real time credit control is required, the credit control client contacts the credit control server before and while the service is provided to an end user.
Due to the real time nature of the application, communication delays SHOULD be minimized, e.g., to avoid an overly long service setup time experienced by the end user.
The Tx timer is introduced to control the waiting time in the client in the Pending state.
When the Tx timer elapses, the credit control client takes action for the end user according to the value of the CCFH or the DDFH.
The recommended value is 10 seconds.
The Tcc timer supervises an ongoing credit control session in the credit control server.
It is RECOMMENDED to use the Validity Time as input to set the Tcc timer value.
In the case of transient failures in the network, the Diameter Credit Control server might change to Idle state.
To avoid this, the Tcc timer MAY be set so that Tcc is equal to 2 x Validity Time.
Credit Control Failure Handling and Direct Debiting Failure Handling Client implementations may offer the possibility of locally configuring these AVPs.
In such a case, their values and behavior are defined in Sections 5.7 and 6.5, respectively.
Security Considerations Security considerations regarding the Diameter protocol itself are discussed in [RFC6733].
The use of this application of Diameter MUST take into consideration the security issues and requirements of the base protocol.
This application includes a mechanism for application layer replay protection by means of (1)
Id AVP as specified in [RFC6733] and (2)
the CC Request Number AVP, which is specified in this document.
The Diameter Credit Control application is often used within one domain, and there may be a single hop between the peers.
In these environments, the use of TLS/TCP, DTLS/SCTP (Datagram Transport Layer Security / Stream Control Transmission Protocol), or IPsec is sufficient.
The details of security considerations related to TLS/TCP, DTLS/SCTP, and IPsec are discussed in [RFC6733].
Because this application handles monetary transactions (directly or indirectly), it increases interest in various security attacks.
Therefore, all parties communicating with each other MUST be authenticated, including, for instance, TLS client side authentication.
In addition, authorization of the client SHOULD be emphasized, i.e., that the client is allowed to perform credit control for a certain user.
The specific means of authorization are outside the scope of this specification but can be, for instance, manual configuration.
Another kind of threat is malicious modification, injection, or deletion of AVPs or complete credit control messages.
The credit control messages contain sensitive billing related information (such as subscription identifiers, granted units, used units, or cost information) whose malicious modification can have financial consequences.
Sometimes simply delaying the credit control messages can cause disturbances in the credit control client or server.
Even without any modifications to the messages, an adversary that can eavesdrop on transactions can obtain privacy sensitive information.
Also, by monitoring the credit control messages, one can collect information about the credit control server's billing models and business relationships.
When third party relays or proxies are involved, hop by hop security does not necessarily provide sufficient protection for Diameter user sessions.
In some cases, it may be inappropriate to send Diameter messages, such as CCR messages and CCA messages, containing sensitive AVPs via untrusted Diameter proxy agents, as there are no assurances that third party proxies will not modify the credit control commands or AVP values.
Direct Connection with Redirects A Diameter Credit Control agent cannot always know whether agents between it and the end user's Diameter Credit Control server are reliable.
In this case, the Diameter Credit Control agent doesn't have a routing entry in its Diameter routing table (defined in [RFC6733], Section 2.7) for the realm of the credit control server in the end user's home realm.
The Diameter Credit Control agent can have a default route configured to a local redirect agent, and it redirects the CCR message to the redirect agent.
The local redirect agent then returns a redirect notification (Result Code 3006, DIAMETER REDIRECT INDICATION) to the credit control agent, as well as information about the Diameter Credit Control server(s)
(Redirect  Host AVP) and information about how the routing entry resulting from the Redirect Host is to be used (Redirect Host Usage AVP).
The Diameter Credit Control agent then forwards the CCR message directly to one of the hosts identified by the CCA message from the redirect agent.
If the value of the Redirect Host Usage AVP does not equal zero, all subsequent messages are sent to the host specified in the Redirect Host AVP until the time specified by the Redirect Max Cache  Time AVP has expired.
Even with redirects, there are some authorization issues.
There may be attacks toward nodes that have been properly authorized but that abuse their authorization or have been compromised.
These issues are discussed more widely in [RFC4072], Section 8. 14.2.
This document includes a redirection feature (Section 5.6.2) whereby the service provider can redirect (in an application specific way)
the end user to an alternate location when their credits have expired.
This technique is useful in that it allows the user to return to normal service quickly, but it also exposes additional risks and attack surface.
In particular, this redirection can potentially occur at an arbitrary point in a user's session, potentially without any additional contextual confirmation available to the user that the redirection is driven by the network.
This lack of confirmation matters because, in many application protocols, the communication peer is also capable of inducing redirection.
When the peer is an attacker, the redirection can be to an attacker controlled site.
In particular, such sites may be "phishing" sites designed to appear similar to legitimate payment sites in an attempt to obtain users' payment information for fraudulent purposes.
When users become accustomed to such redirections, they may have difficulty distinguishing such attacks from legitimate redirections.
Because of the potentially harmful consequences of arbitrary redirection by an attacker (such as to phishing sites), it is important for service providers to be aware of that risk and ensure that their users are aware of it as well.
Service providers should follow industry best practices for the specific application layer protocol to reduce the chances that such attacks could be mistaken for legitimate redirections.
The details of such a practice are out of scope for this document.
As the Diameter protocol, and especially the credit control application, deal with subscribers and their actions, extra care should be taken regarding the privacy of the subscribers.
Per terminology used in [RFC6973], both the credit control client and the credit control server are intermediary entities, wherein the subscribers' privacy may be compromised even if no security issues exist, and only authorized entities have access to the privacy  sensitive information.
The privacy sensitive AVPs listed in this section MUST NOT be sent across non trusted networks or Diameter agents without end to end authentication and confidentiality protection, as described in [RFC6733], Section 13.3.
The following AVPs contain privacy sensitive information at different levels: 1.
: may contain privacy sensitive information, as the service provider may encode personal information that helps it correlate different subscriptions and access technologies.
Check Balance Result AVP: contains information on the balance status of the subscriber.
Currency Code AVP: contains information on the subscriber's locale.
Cost Unit AVP: contains privacy sensitive information for the Cost Information AVP, in human readable format.
Service Identifier AVP: may contain privacy sensitive information about the subscriber's Internet activity.
Rating Group AVP: may contain privacy sensitive information about the subscriber's Internet activity.
Restriction Filter Rule AVP: the information inside IPFilterRule may be used to infer services used by the subscriber.
Redirect Server Address AVP: the service provider might embed personal information on the subscriber in the URL/URI (e.g., to create a personalized message).
However, the service provider may instead anonymize the subscriber's identity in the URL/URI and let the redirect server query the information directly.
Such anonymized information must not allow personal information or the subscriber's identity to be easily guessed.
Furthermore, the service provider should treat
the URL/URI schema itself as confidential and make sure it cannot be inferred (1) from observation of the traffic or (2) due to its trivial structure.
A trivial structure could allow an adversary to query/modify personal information even without knowing the subscriber's identity.
Similar AVPs are Redirect Address URL and Redirect  Address SIP URI.
AVP: depending on how the service provider uses it, it may contain privacy sensitive information about the service (e.g., in a 3GPP network Service Context
AVP, it has a different value for packet switching, SMS, Multimedia Messages (MMSs), etc.).
Service Parameter Info AVP: depending on how the service provider uses it, it may contain privacy sensitive information about the subscriber (e.g., location).
d Data AVP: contains the identity of the subscriber.
Similar AVPs are Subscription Id
Subscription Id  NAI, and Subscription Id
User Equipment Info Value AVP: contains the identity of the device of the subscriber.
Similar AVPs are User Equipment Info  IMEISV, User Equipment Info MAC, User Equipment Info EUI64, User Equipment Info ModifiedEUI64, and
QoS Final Unit Indication AVP:
Grouped AVP that may contain privacy sensitive information in its sub AVPs (e.g., IPFilterRule, redirect address).
Note that some AVPs that are used in this document are defined in [RFC6733] and may contain privacy sensitive information.
These AVPs are not listed above.
Due to the nature of the credit control application, some personal data and identity information must be stored in both the credit control client and the credit control server.
However, this could be minimized by following these guidelines: 1.
Data stored in the credit control client does not need to persist across sessions.
All data could be deleted once the session ends and could be reconstructed once a new session is initialized.
Note that while the credit control server is usually owned by the service provider with which the subscriber already has some direct legal or business relationship (where the privacy level could be agreed upon), this is not always true for a credit control client that may be owned by a third party.
Some information about the subscriber has to be stored in persistent storage in the credit control server (e.g., identity, balance); however, per transaction information does not have to be stored in persistent storage, and per session information may be deleted from persistent storage once the session ends.
In some cases, per transaction information has to be stored on the credit control server, client, or both, for regulatory, auditability, or debugging reasons.
However, this could be minimized by following these guidelines:
A.  Data retention does not need to exceed the required duration.
B.  Transaction information could be aggregated in some cases (e.g., prefer information per session over information per rating group; prefer hourly byte summary over per transaction byte counts).
If not strictly needed, information that is more sensitive (e.g., location, equipment type) could be filtered out of such logs.
This information is often used to make rating decisions, and in this case, the rating decisions should be logged instead of the data used to make them.
Due to the reasons explained in the first guideline, the credit control server, rather than the credit control client, would be the preferred location for storing such transaction information.
Diameter Agents Diameter agents, as described in [RFC6733], may be owned by third parties.
If end to end security is supported between the credit control client and the credit control server, the operator can use it to encrypt privacy sensitive AVPs (as listed in Section 15.1) and prevent such information from leaking into the agent.
In some cases, the Diameter agent needs access to privacy sensitive AVPs, in order to make correct routing decisions or even to modify the content of these AVPs.
For example, a proxy agent may need to look at the Subscription
Id IMSI AVP, in order to extract the mobile country and network codes of the user and use them to look up the destination to which the request should be routed (see Section 2.8.2 in [RFC6733]).
In such a case, the credit control client and credit control server may use a mechanism that anonymizes the identity of the subscriber, as well as a mechanism to encrypt other AVPs not used by the agent.
Appendix A.  Credit Control Sequences A.1.
A credit control flow for Network Access Services prepaid is shown in Figure 11.
The Diameter protocol application is implemented in the Network Access Server (NAS) per [RFC7155].
The focus of this flow is on credit authorization.
The user logs on to the network (1).
The Diameter NAS sends a Diameter AA Request (AAR) to the home Diameter AAA server (2).
The credit control client populates the AAR with
the Credit Control AVP set to CREDIT AUTHORIZATION, and service specific AVPs are included, as usual [RFC7155].
The home Diameter AAA server performs service  specific authentication and authorization, as usual.
The home Diameter AAA server determines that the user is a prepaid user and notices from the Credit Control AVP that the NAS has credit control capabilities.
It sends a Diameter Credit Control Request with CC Request Type set to INITIAL REQUEST to the Diameter Credit Control server to perform credit authorization (3) and to establish a credit control session.
(The home Diameter AAA server may forward service specific AVPs received from the NAS as input for the rating process.)
The Diameter Credit Control server checks the end user's account balance, rates the service, and reserves credit from the end user's account.
The reserved quota is returned to the home Diameter AAA server in the Diameter Credit Control Answer (4).
The home Diameter AAA server sends the reserved quota to the NAS in the Diameter AA Answer (AAA).
Upon receiving the AA Answer, the NAS starts the credit control session and starts monitoring the granted units (5).
The NAS grants access to the end user (6).
At the expiry of the allocated quota, the NAS sends a Diameter Credit Control  Request with CC Request Type set to UPDATE REQUEST to the home Diameter AAA server (7).
This message contains the units used thus far.
The home Diameter AAA server forwards the CCR to the Diameter Credit Control server (8).
The Diameter Credit Control server debits the used units from the end user's account and allocates a new quota that is returned to the home Diameter AAA server in the Diameter Credit Control Answer (9).
The message is forwarded to the NAS (10).
During the ongoing credit control session, the authorization lifetime expires, and the authorization/authentication client in the NAS performs service specific re authorization to the home Diameter AAA server, as usual.
The credit control client populates the AAR with
the Credit Control AVP set to RE AUTHORIZATION, indicating that the credit control server shall not be contacted, as the credit authorization is controlled by the burning rate of the granted units (11).
The home Diameter AAA server performs service specific re authorization as usual and returns the AA Answer to the NAS (12).
The end user logs off from the network (13).
To debit the used units from the end user's account and to stop the credit control session, the NAS sends a Diameter Credit Control Request with CC Request Type set to TERMINATION REQUEST to the home Diameter AAA server (14).
The home Diameter AAA server forwards the CCR to the credit control server (15).
The Diameter Credit Control server acknowledges the session termination by sending a Diameter Credit Control Answer to the home Diameter AAA server (16).
The home Diameter AAA server forwards the answer to the NAS (17).
The STR/STA takes place between the NAS and home Diameter AAA server, as usual (18), (19).
Flow II Figure 12 provides an example of Diameter Credit Control for SIP sessions.
Although the flow focuses on illustrating the usage of credit control messages, the SIP signaling is inaccurate, and the diagram is not by any means an attempt to define a service provider's SIP network.
However, for the sake of this example, some assumptions are made below.
Typically, prepaid services based, for example, on time usage for SIP sessions require an entity in the service provider network to intercept all the requests within the SIP dialog in order to detect events, such as session establishment and session release, that are essential for performing credit control operations with the credit control server.
Therefore, in this example, it is assumed that the SIP Proxy adds a Record Route header in the initial SIP INVITE to make sure that all the future requests in the created dialog traverse through it (for the definitions of "Record Route" and "dialog", please refer to [RFC3261]).
Finally, the degree of credit control measuring of the media by the proxy depends on the business model design used in setting up the end system and proxies in the SIP network.
The end user (SIP User Agent A) sends a REGISTER with credentials (i).
The SIP Proxy sends a request to the home AAA server to perform multimedia authentication and authorization by using, for instance, a Diameter multimedia application (ii).
The home AAA server checks that the credentials are correct and checks the user profile.
Eventually, a 200 OK response (iii) is sent to the User Agent.
Note that the authentication and authorization are valid for the registration validity period duration
(i.e., until re registration is performed).
Several SIP sessions may be established without re authorization.
User Agent A sends an INVITE (1).
The SIP Proxy sends a Diameter Credit Control Request (INITIAL REQUEST) to the Diameter Credit Control server (2).
The Credit Control Request contains information obtained from the SIP signaling describing the requested service (e.g., calling party, called party, Session Description Protocol (SDP) attributes).
The Diameter Credit Control server checks the end user's account balance, rates the service, and reserves credit from the end user's account.
The reserved quota is returned to the SIP Proxy in the Diameter Credit Control Answer (3).
The SIP Proxy forwards the SIP INVITE to User Agent B (4).
B's phone rings, and B answers.
The media flows between them, and the SIP Proxy starts measuring the quota.
At the expiry of the allocated quota, the SIP Proxy sends a Diameter Credit Control Request (UPDATE REQUEST) to the Diameter Credit Control server (5).
This message contains the units used thus far.
The Diameter Credit Control server debits the used units from the end user's account and allocates new credit that is returned to the SIP Proxy in the Diameter Credit Control Answer (6).
The end user terminates the service by sending a BYE message (7).
The SIP Proxy forwards the BYE message to User Agent B (8) and sends a Diameter Credit Control  Request (TERMINATION REQUEST) to the credit control server (9).
The Diameter Credit Control server acknowledges the session termination by sending a Diameter Credit Control Answer to the SIP Proxy (10).
A credit control flow for Multimedia Messaging Service is shown in Figure 13.
The sender is charged as soon as the messaging server successfully stores the message.
This is an example of Diameter Credit Control for direct debiting using the Multimedia Messaging Service environment.
Although the flow focuses on illustrating the usage of credit control messages, the MMS signaling is inaccurate, and the diagram is not by any means an attempt to define a service provider's MMS configuration or billing model.
End user A sends an MMS to the MMS server (1).
The MMS server stores the message and sends a Diameter Credit Control Request (EVENT REQUEST with Requested Action set to DIRECT DEBITING) to the Diameter Credit Control server (2).
The Credit Control Request contains information about the MMS message (e.g., size, recipient address, image coding type).
The Diameter Credit Control server checks the end user's account balance, rates the service, and debits the service from the end user's account.
The granted quota is returned to the MMS server in the Diameter Credit Control Answer (3).
The MMS server acknowledges the successful reception of the MMS message (4).
The MMS server notifies the recipient about the new MMS (5), and end user B retrieves the message from the MMS message store (6), (7).
Note that the transfer of the MMS message can take an extended period of time and can fail, in which case a recovery action is needed.
The MMS server should return the already debited units to the user's account by using the REFUND action described in Section 6.4.
Another credit control flow for Multimedia Messaging Service is shown in Figure 14.
The recipient is charged at the time of message delivery.
This is an example of Diameter Credit Control for direct debiting using the Multimedia Messaging Service environment.
Although the flow focuses on illustrating the usage of credit control messages, the MMS signaling is inaccurate, and the diagram is not by any means an attempt to define a service provider's MMS configuration or billing model.
A content server sends an MMS to the MMS server (1), which stores the message.
The message recipient will be charged for the MMS message in this case.
As there can be a substantially long time between the receipt of the message at the MMS server and the actual retrieval of the message, the MMS server does not establish any credit control sessions to the Diameter Credit Control server; rather, it first performs only a balance check (without any credit reservations) by sending a Diameter Credit Control Request (EVENT REQUEST with Requested Action set to CHECK BALANCE) to verify that end user B can cover the cost for the MMS (2).
The Diameter Credit Control server checks the end user's account balance and returns the answer to the MMS server in the Diameter Credit Control Answer (3).
The MMS server acknowledges the successful reception of the MMS message (4).
The MMS server notifies the recipient of the new MMS (5), and after some time end user B retrieves the message from the MMS message store (6).
The MMS server sends a Diameter Credit Control Request (EVENT REQUEST with Requested Action set to DIRECT DEBITING) to the Diameter Credit Control server (7).
The Credit Control Request contains information about the MMS message (e.g., size, recipient address, coding type).
The Diameter Credit Control server checks the end user's account balance, rates the service, and debits the service from the end user's account.
The granted quota is returned to the MMS server in the Diameter Credit Control Answer (8).
The MMS is transferred to end user B (9).
Note that the transfer of the MMS message can take an extended period of time and can fail, in which case a recovery action is needed.
The MMS server should return the already debited units to the user's account by using the REFUND action described in Section 6.4.
Flow V Figure 15 provides an example of an Advice of Charge (AoC) service for a SIP call.
This is an example of Diameter Credit Control for SIP sessions.
Although the flow focuses on illustrating the usage of credit control messages, the SIP signaling is inaccurate, and the diagram is not by any means an attempt to define a service provider's SIP network.
User Agent A can be either a postpaid or prepaid subscriber using the AoC service.
It is assumed that the SIP controller also has HTTP capabilities and delivers an interactive AoC web page with, for instance, the cost information
, the details of the call derived from the SDP, and a button to accept/not accept the charges.
(There may be many other ways to deliver AoC information; however, this flow focuses on the use of the credit control messages.)
The user has been authenticated and authorized prior to initiating the call and has been subscribed to the AoC service.
User Agent A sends an INVITE with the SDP to User Agent B via the SIP controller (1).
The SIP controller determines that the user is subscribed to an AoC service and sends a Diameter Credit Control  Request (EVENT REQUEST with Requested Action set to PRICE ENQUIRY) to the Diameter Credit Control server (2).
The Credit Control Request contains SIP specific AVPs derived from the SIP signaling, describing the requested service (e.g., calling party, called party, SDP attributes).
The Diameter Credit Control server determines the cost of the service and returns the Credit Control Answer, including the Cost Information AVP (3).
The SIP controller manufactures the AoC web page with information received in SIP signaling and with the cost information received from the credit control server.
It then sends a SIP MESSAGE that contains a URL pointing to the AoC information web page (4).
Upon receipt of the SIP MESSAGE, User Agent A automatically invokes the web browser that retrieves the AoC information (5).
The user clicks on the appropriate button to accept the charges (6).
The SIP controller continues the session and sends the INVITE to User Agent B, which accepts the call (7), (8), (9).
Flow VI Figure 16 illustrates a credit control flow for the REFUND case.
It is assumed that there is a trusted relationship and secure connection between the gaming server and the Diameter Credit Control server.
The end user may be a prepaid subscriber or a postpaid subscriber.
While the end user is playing the game (1), they enter a new level that entitles them to a bonus.
The gaming server sends a Diameter Credit Control Request (EVENT REQUEST with Requested Action set to REFUND ACCOUNT) to the Diameter Credit Control server (2).
The Credit Control Request contains the Requested Service Unit AVP with the CC Service Specific Units containing the number of points the user just won.
The Service Parameter Info AVP is also included in the request and specifies the service event to be rated (e.g., Tetris Bonus).
From information received, the Diameter Credit Control server determines the amount to be credited, refunds the user's account, and returns the Credit Control Answer, including the Cost Information AVP (3).
The Cost Information AVP indicates the credited amount.
At the first opportunity, the gaming server notifies the end user of the credited amount (4).
Flow VII Figure 17 provides an example of graceful service termination for a SIP call.
It is assumed that the call is set up so that the controller is in the call as a B2BUA (Back to Back User Agent) performing third party call control (3PCC).
Note that the SIP signaling is inaccurate, as the focus of this flow is on graceful service termination and credit control authorization.
Best practices for 3PCC are defined in [RFC3725].
The call is ongoing between User Agents A and B; User Agent A has a prepaid subscription.
At the expiry of the allocated quota, the SIP controller sends a Diameter Credit Control Request (UPDATE REQUEST) to the Diameter Credit Control server (1).
This message contains the units used thus far.
The Diameter Credit Control server debits the used units from the end user's account and allocates the final quota returned to the SIP controller in the Diameter Credit Control Answer (2).
This message contains the Final Unit Indication AVP with Final Unit Action set to REDIRECT,
the Redirect Address Type set to SIP URI, and
the Redirect Server Address set to the top up server name (e.g., sip:sip topup server@domain.com).
At the expiry of the final allocated quota, the SIP controller sends a Diameter Credit Control Request (UPDATE REQUEST) to the Diameter Credit Control server (3) and places the called party on "hold" by sending an INVITE with the appropriate connection address in the SDP (3a).
The Credit Control Request message contains the units used thus far.
The Diameter Credit Control server debits the used units from the end user's account but does not make any credit reservations.
The Credit Control Answer message, which contains the Validity Time to supervise the graceful service termination process, is returned to the SIP controller (4).
The SIP controller establishes a SIP session between the prepaid user and the top up server (5), (6).
The top up server plays an announcement and prompts the user to enter a credit card number and the amount of money to be used to replenish the account (7).
The top up server validates the credit card number, replenishes the user's account (using some means outside the scope of this specification), and releases the SIP session (8).
The SIP controller can now assume that communication between the prepaid user and the top up server took place.
It sends a spontaneous Credit Control Request (UPDATE REQUEST) to the Diameter Credit Control server to check whether the account has been replenished (9).
The Diameter Credit Control server reserves credit from the end user's account and returns the reserved quota to the SIP controller in the Credit Control Answer (10).
At this point, the SIP controller reconnects the caller and the called party (11), (12).
Flow VIII Figure 18 provides an example of graceful service termination initiated when the first interrogation takes place because the user's account is empty.
In this example, the credit control server supports the server initiated credit re authorization.
The Diameter protocol application is implemented in the NAS per [RFC7155].
The user logs on to the network (1).
The Diameter NAS sends a Diameter AA Request (AAR) to the home Diameter AAA server (2).
The credit control client populates the AAR with
the Credit Control AVP set to CREDIT AUTHORIZATION, and service specific AVPs are included, as usual [RFC7155].
The home Diameter AAA server performs service  specific authentication and authorization, as usual.
The home Diameter AAA server determines that the user has a prepaid subscription and notices from the Credit Control AVP that the NAS has credit control capabilities.
It sends a Diameter Credit Control  Request with CC Request Type set to INITIAL REQUEST to the Diameter Credit Control server to perform credit authorization (3) and to establish a credit control session.
(The home Diameter AAA server may forward service specific AVPs received from the NAS as input for the rating process.)
The Diameter Credit Control server checks the end user's account balance, determines that the account cannot cover the cost of the service, and initiates graceful service termination.
The Credit Control Answer is returned to the home Diameter AAA server (4).
This message contains the Final Unit Indication AVP and the Validity Time AVP set to a reasonable amount of time, to give the user a chance to replenish their account (e.g., 10 minutes).
The Final Unit Indication AVP includes the Final Unit Action set to REDIRECT, the Redirect Address Type set to URL, and the Redirect  Server Address set to the HTTP top up server name.
The home Diameter AAA server sends the received Credit Control AVPs to the NAS in the Diameter AA Answer (5).
Upon successful AAA, the NAS starts the credit control session and immediately starts graceful service termination, as instructed by the server.
The NAS grants limited access to the user (6).
The HTTP client software running in the user's device opens the transport connection redirected by the NAS to the top up server (7), (8).
An appropriate web page is provided for the user where the user can enter the credit card number and the amount of money to be used to replenish the account, along with a notification message that they are granted unlimited access if the replenishment operation will be successfully executed within, for example, the next 10 minutes.
The top up server validates the credit card number and replenishes the user's account (using some means outside the scope of this specification)
After successful account top up, the credit control server sends a Re Auth Request message to the NAS (10).
The NAS acknowledges the request by returning the Re Auth Answer message (11) and initiates the credit re authorization by sending a Credit Control Request (UPDATE REQUEST) to the Diameter Credit Control server (12), (13).
The Diameter Credit Control server reserves credit from the end user's account and returns the reserved quota to the NAS via the home Diameter AAA server in the Credit Control Answer (14), (15).
The NAS removes the restriction applied by graceful service termination and starts monitoring the granted units.
The Diameter Credit Control application defines the Multiple  Services Credit Control AVP, which can be used to support independent credit control of multiple services in a single credit control (sub )session for Service Elements that have such capabilities.
It is possible to request and allocate resources as a credit pool that is shared between services or rating groups.
Figure 19 illustrates a usage scenario where the credit control client and server support independent credit control of multiple services, as defined in Section 5.1.2.
It is assumed that service  identifiers, rating groups, and their associated parameters (e.g., IP 5 tuples) are locally configured in the Service Element or provisioned by an entity other than the credit control server.
Example of Independent Credit Control of Multiple Services in a Credit Control (Sub )Session
The user logs on to the network (1).
The Service Element sends a Diameter Credit Control Request with CC Request Type set to INITIAL REQUEST to the Diameter Credit Control server to perform credit authorization for the bearer service (e.g., Internet access service) and to establish a credit control session (2).
In this message, the credit control client indicates support for independent credit control of multiple services within the session by including the Multiple Services Indicator AVP.
The Diameter Credit Control server checks the end user's account balance, with rating information received from the client (i.e., Service Id and access specific AVPs); rates the request; and reserves credit from the end user's account.
Suppose that the server reserves $5 and determines that the cost is $1/MB.
It then returns to the Service Element a Credit Control  Answer message that includes the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP with a quota of 5 MB associated to the Service Id (access), to a multiplier value of 10, and to Pool
The user uses service 1 (4).
The Service Element sends a Diameter Credit Control Request with CC Request Type set to UPDATE REQUEST to the credit control server to perform credit authorization for service 1 (5).
This message includes the Multiple Services Credit  Control AVP to request service units for service 1 that belong to Rating Group 1.
The Diameter Credit Control server determines that service 1 draws credit resources from the same account as the access service (i.e., pool 1).
It rates the request according to Service Id/rating group and updates the existing reservation by requesting more credit.
Suppose that the server reserves $5 more (now the reservation is $10) and determines that the cost is $0.1/minute.
The server authorizes the whole rating group.
It then returns to the Service Element a Credit Control Answer message that includes the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP with a quota of 50 minutes associated to Rating Group 1, to a multiplier value of 1, and to Pool
The client adjusts the total amount of resources for pool 1 according to the received quota, which gives S for pool 1   100.
The user uses service 2, which belongs to the authorized rating group (Rating Group 1) (7).
Resources are then consumed from pool 1.
The user now requests services 3 and 4 as well, which are not authorized (8).
The Service Element sends a Diameter Credit Control  Request with CC Request Type set to UPDATE REQUEST to the credit control server in order to perform credit authorization for services 3 and 4 (9).
This message includes two instances of the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP to request service units for service 3 that belong to Rating Group 2 and service units for service 4 that belong to Rating Group 3.
The Diameter Credit Control server determines that services 3 and 4 draw credit resources from another account (i.e., pool 2).
It checks the end user's account balance and, according to Service Id/rating group information, rates the request.
It then reserves credit from pool 2.
For example, the server reserves $5 and determines that service 3 costs $0.2/MB and service 4 costs $0.5/MB.
The server authorizes only services 3 and 4.
It returns to the Service Element a Credit Control Answer message that includes two instances of the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP (10).
One instance grants a quota of 12.5 MB associated to Service Id 3 to a multiplier value of 2 and to Pool
The other instance grants a quota of 5 MB associated to Service I
d 4 to a multiplier value of 5 and to Pool
The server also determines that pool 2 is exhausted and service 4 is not allowed to continue after these units will be consumed.
Therefore, the Final Unit Indication AVP with action TERMINATE is associated to Service Id 4.
The client calculates the total amount of resources that can be used for pool 2 according to the received quotas and multipliers, which gives S for pool 2   50.
The Validity Time for the access service expires.
The Service Element sends a Credit Control Request message to the server in order to perform credit re authorization for the Service Id (access) (11).
This message carries one instance of the Multiple Services Credit  Control AVP that includes the units used by this service.
Suppose that the total amount of used units is 4 MB.
The client adjusts the total amount of resources for pool 1 accordingly, which gives S for pool 1   60.
The server deducts $4 from the user's account and updates the reservation by requesting more credit.
Suppose that the server reserves $5 more (now the reservation is $11) and already knows the cost of the Service Id (access), which is $1/MB.
It then returns to the Service Element a Credit Control Answer message that includes the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP with a quota of 5 MB associated to the Service Id (access), to a multiplier value of 10, and to Pool
The client adjusts the total amount of resources for pool 1 according to the received quota, which gives S for pool 1   110.
Services 3 and 4 consume the total amount of pool 2's credit resources (i.e., C1 2   C2 5
The Service Element immediately starts the TERMINATE action for service 4 and sends a Credit Control  Request message with CC Request Type set to UPDATE REQUEST to the credit control server in order to perform credit re authorization for service 3 (13).
This message contains two instances of the Multiple  Services Credit Control AVP to report the units used by services 3 and 4.
The server deducts the last $5 from the user's account (pool 2) and returns the answer with Result Code 4011 in the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP to indicate that service 3 can continue without credit control (14).
The end user logs off from the network (15).
To debit the used units from the end user's account and to stop the credit control session, the Service Element sends a Diameter Credit Control Request with CC Request Type set to TERMINATION REQUEST to the credit control server (16).
This message contains the units used by each service in multiple instances of the Multiple Services Credit Control AVP.
The used units are associated with the relevant Service Identifier and rating group.
The Diameter Credit Control server debits the used units to the user's account (pool 1) and acknowledges the session termination by sending a Diameter Credit Control Answer to the Service Element (17).
