This Network Working Group Request for Comments documents the currently assigned values from several series of numbers used in network protocol implementations.
This RFC will be updated periodically, and in any case current information can be obtained from Jon Postel.
The assignment of numbers is also handled by Jon.
If you are developing a protocol or application that will require the use of a link, socket, etc.
please contact Jon to receive a number assignment.
Jon Postel USC Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
90291 phone: (213) 822 1511 ARPANET mail: POSTEL@ISIB
Most of the protocols mentioned here are documented in the RFC series of notes.
The more prominent and more generally used are documented in the Protocol Handbook [1] prepared by the Network Information Center (NIC).
In the lists that follow a bracketed number, e.g. [1], off to the right of the page indicates a reference to the protocol assigned that number.
Assigned Numbers Assigned Link Numbers
The word "link" here refers to a field in the original ARPANET Host/IMP interface leader.
The link was originally defined as an 8 bit field.
Some time after the ARPANET Host to Host (AHHP) protocol was defined and, by now, some time ago the definition of this field was changed to "Message ID" and the length to 12 bits.
The name link now refers to the high order 8 bits of this 12 bit message id field.
The low order 4 bits of the message
id field are to be zero unless specifically specified otherwise for the particular protocol used on that link.
The Host/IMP interface is defined in BBN report 1822
304 377   Experimental Protocols Assigned Numbers Assigned Socket Numbers
SOCKET NUMBERS Sockets are used in the AHHP [1,3] to name the ends of logical connections which carry long term conversations.
For the purpose of providing services to all callers an Initial Connection Procedure ICP [1,34] is used between the user process and the server process.
This list specifies the socket used by the server process as its contact socket.
Network Wide Standard Function 64 127
100 177   Hosts Specific Functions 128 223
Use 224 255   340 377
Any Experimental Function Assigned Numbers Assigned Socket Numbers Specific Assignments:
[31,32] Assigned Numbers Assigned Network Numbers ASSIGNED NETWORK NUMBERS
This list of network numbers is used in the internetwork protocols now under development, the field is 8 bits in size.
In the internetwork protocols there is a field to identify the version of the internetwork general protocol.
This field is 4 bits in size.
In the internetwork protocols there is a field to identify the format of the host level specific protocol.
This field is 8 bits in size.
In the internetwork old protocol there is a field to identify the type of the message.
This field is 4 bits in size.
