Abstract This document provides a security framework for the MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP).
MPLS TP extends MPLS technologies and introduces new Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) capabilities, a transport oriented path protection mechanism, and strong emphasis on static provisioning supported by network management systems.
This document addresses the security aspects relevant in the context of MPLS TP specifically.
It describes potential security threats as well as mitigation procedures related to MPLS TP networks and to MPLS TP interconnection to other MPLS and GMPLS networks.
This document is built on RFC 5920 ("Security Framework for MPLS and GMPLS Networks") by providing additional security considerations that are applicable to the MPLS TP extensions.
All the security considerations from RFC 5920 are assumed to apply.
This document is a product of a joint Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) / International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU T) effort to include an MPLS Transport Profile within the IETF MPLS and Pseudowire Emulation Edge
to Edge (PWE3) architectures to support the capabilities and functionality of a packet transport network.
This document provides a security framework for the MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP).
As defined in "Requirements of an MPLS Transport Profile" [RFC5654] and "A Framework for MPLS in Transport Networks" [RFC5921], MPLS TP uses a subset of MPLS features and introduces extensions to reflect the characteristics of the transport technology.
The additional functionality includes in band OAM, transport oriented path protection and recovery mechanisms, and new OAM capabilities that were developed for MPLS TP but that also apply to MPLS and GMPLS.
There is strong emphasis in MPLS TP on static provisioning support through Network Management Systems (NMSs) or Operational Support Systems (OSSs).
This document is built on [RFC5920] by providing additional security considerations that are applicable to the MPLS TP extensions.
The security models, threats, and defense techniques previously defined in [RFC5920] are assumed to apply to general aspects of MPLS TP.
This document is a product of a joint Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) / International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU T) effort to include an MPLS Transport Profile within the IETF MPLS and PWE3 architectures to support the capabilities and functionality of a packet transport network.
Readers can refer to [RFC5654] and [RFC5921] for MPLS TP terminologies and to [RFC5920] for security terminologies that are relevant to MPLS and GMPLS.
This section defines reference models for security in MPLS TP networks.
The models are built on the architecture of MPLS TP, as defined in [RFC5921].
The placement of SP boundaries plays an important role in determining the security models for any particular deployment.
This document defines a trusted zone as being where a single SP has total operational control over that part of the network.
A primary concern is about security aspects that relate to breaches of security from the "outside" of a trusted zone to the "inside" of this zone.
In reference model 1, a single SP has total control of the "PE/T PE to PE/T PE" part of the MPLS TP network.
Security reference model 1(a) shows an MPLS TP network with Single Segment Pseudowire (SS PW) from PE1 to PE2.
The trusted zone is PE1 to PE2, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Trusted Zone    Untrusted  Figure 1.
MPLS TP Security Model 1(a)
Security reference model 1(b) shows an MPLS TP network with Multi Segment Pseudowire (MS PW) from T PE1 to T PE2.
The trusted zone is T PE1 to T PE2, as illustrated in Figure 2.
MPLS TP Security Model 1(b) 2.2.
In reference model 2, a single SP does not have the end to end control of the segment from PE/T PE to PE/T PE.
A given S PE or T PE may be under the control of another SP, that SP's customers, or its partners.
In this case, the MPLS TP network is not contained within a single trusted zone.
Security reference model 2(a) shows an MPLS TP network with Multi Segment Pseudowire (MS PW) from T PE1 to T PE2.
The trusted zone is T PE1 to S PE1, as illustrated in Figure 3.
MPLS TP Security Model 2(a)
Security reference model 2(b) shows an MPLS TP network with Multi Segment Pseudowire (MS PW) from T PE1 to T PE2.
The trusted zone is the S PE1 only, as illustrated in Figure 4.
Untrusted  Trusted Zone Figure 4.
MPLS TP Security Model 2(b)
Security reference model 2(c) shows an MPLS TP network with Multi Segment Pseudowire (MS PW) from different SPs with inter provider PW connections.
The trusted zone is T PE1 to S PE3, as illustrated in Figure 5.
MPLS TP Security Model 2(c)
In general, the boundaries of a trusted zone must be carefully defined when analyzing the security properties of each individual network.
The security boundaries determine which reference model should be applied to a given network topology.
This section discusses various network security threats that are unique to MPLS TP and may endanger MPLS TP networks.
Attacks against a GAL or G ACh may include the following: GAL or BFD label manipulation, which includes insertion of false labels and modification, deletion, or replay of messages.
DoS attacks through in band OAM by generating excessive G ACh/GAL and BFD messages that consume significant bandwidth and potentially cause congestion.
These attacks can cause unauthorized protection switchover, inability to restore one or more LSPs, or loss of network connectivity.
When an NMS is used for LSP setup, attacks on the NMS can cause the above effects as well.
Although this is not unique to MPLS TP, MPLS TP networks can be particularly vulnerable to NMS attacks, due to the fact that static provisioning through NMSs is a commonly used model.
In the static provisioning model, a compromised NMS can potentially be comparable to a compromised control plane plus a compromised management plane in the dynamic controlled network model.
Attacks on NMSs may come from either external attackers or insiders.
Outside attacks are initiated outside of the trusted zone by unauthorized users of the MPLS TP NMSs.
Insider attacks are initiated from inside the trusted zone by an entity that has authorized access to the management systems but that performs unapproved functions that are harmful to the MPLS TP networks.
These attacks may directly target the NMS; they may also take place via the compromised communication channels between the NMS and the network devices that are being provisioned, or through user access to the provisioning tools.
This type of security threat may include disclosure of information, generating false OAM messages, taking down MPLS TP LSPs, connecting to the wrong MPLS TP tunnel endpoints, and DoS attacks on the MPLS TP networks.
There are other more generic security threats, such as unauthorized observation of data traffic (including traffic pattern analysis), modification or deletion of a provider's or user's data, and replay or insertion of inauthentic data into a provider's or user's data stream.
These types of attacks apply to MPLS TP traffic regardless of how the LSP or PW is set up, in a way that is similar to how they apply to MPLS traffic regardless of how the LSP is set up.
More details on the above mentioned threats are documented in [RFC5920].
Such threats may result from malicious behavior or accidental errors: Example 1: Attacks from users: Users of the MPLS TP network may attack the network infrastructure or attack other users.
Example 2: Attacks from insiders: Employees of the operators may attack the MPLS TP network, especially through NMSs.
Example 3: Attacks from interconnecting SPs or other partners: Other SPs may attack the MPLS TP network, particularly through the inter provider connections.
Example 4: Attacks as the result of operational errors: Operations staff may fail to follow operational procedures or may make operational mistakes.
The defensive techniques presented in this document and in [RFC5920] are intended to describe methods by which some security threats can be addressed.
They are not intended as requirements for all MPLS TP deployments.
The specific operational environment determines the security requirements for any instance of MPLS TP.
Therefore, protocol designers should provide a full set of security capabilities that can be selected and used where appropriate.
The MPLS TP provider should determine the applicability of these techniques to the provider's specific service offerings, and the end user may wish to assess the value of these techniques to the user's service requirements.
Authentication is the primary defense technique to mitigate the risk of the MPLS TP security threats discussed in Section 3 (GAL or BFD label manipulation, and DoS attacks through in band OAM).
Authentication refers to methods to ensure that message sources are properly identified by the MPLS TP devices with which they communicate.
entity authentication for identity verification management system authentication peer to peer authentication message integrity and replay detection to ensure the validity of message streams network based access controls such as packet filtering and firewalls host based access controls isolation aggregation protection against denial of service event logging Section 5.2 of [RFC5920] describes these techniques where they apply to MPLS and GMPLS in general.
In addition to authentication, the following defense should also be considered in order to protect MPLS TP networks:
Use of isolated infrastructure for MPLS TP One way to protect the MPLS TP infrastructure is to use dedicated network resources to provide MPLS TP transport services.
For example, in security model 2 (Section 2.2), the potential risk of attacks on the S PE1 or T PE1 in the trusted zone may be reduced by using non IP based communication paths, so that the paths in the trusted zone cannot be reached from the outside via IP.
Verification of connectivity To protect against deliberate or accidental misconnection, mechanisms can be put in place to verify both end to end connectivity and segment by segment resources.
These mechanisms can trace the routes of LSPs in both the control plane and the data plane.
Note that the connectivity verification tools are now developed for general MPLS networks as well.
The defense techniques that apply generally to MPLS/GMPLS are not detailed here; see [RFC5920] for details regarding these techniques.
For example: 1) Authentication, including management system authentication, peer to peer authentication, and cryptographic techniques for authenticating identity 2)
Use of aggregated infrastructure 4) Mitigation of denial of service attacks 5)
Monitoring, detection, and reporting of security attacks
It is important to point out the following security defense techniques, as they are particularly critical for NMSs, due to the strong emphasis on static provisioning supported by NMSs in MPLS TP deployments.
These techniques include the following: entity authentication for identity verification encryption for confidentiality message integrity and replay detection to ensure the validity of message streams user access control and event logging, which must be applied for NMSs and provisioning applications 5.
Security Considerations Security considerations constitute the sole subject of this document and hence are discussed throughout.
This document evaluates security risks specific to MPLS TP, as well as mitigation mechanisms that may be used to counter potential threats.
All of the techniques presented here involve mature and widely implemented technologies that are practical to implement.
It is meant to assist equipment vendors and service providers who must ultimately decide what threats to protect against in any given configuration or service offering, from a customer's perspective as well as from a service provider's perspective.
Contributors Raymond Zhang Alcatel Lucent 750D
Chai Chee Road Singapore  469004
EMail: raymond.zhang@alcatel lucent.com Nabil Bitar Verizon 40 Sylvan Road Waltham,
nabil.bitar@verizon.com Masahiro Daikoku KDDI Corporation 3
ms daikoku@kddi.com Lei Wang Lime Networks Strandveien 30, 1366 Lysaker Norway EMail: lei.wang@limenetworks.no
Telecom 10475 Park Meadow Drive Littleton
, CO  80124 US EMail: henry.yu@twtelecom.com
