1500, 1410, 1360, 1280, 1250, 1200, 1140, 1130, 1100, 1083 INTERNET OFFICIAL PROTOCOL STANDARDS Status of this Memo
This memo describes the state of standardization of protocols used in the Internet as determined by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB).
This memo is an Internet Standard.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
Table of Contents Introduction .
The Request for Comments Documents .
Definitions of Protocol State (Maturity Level) .
Definitions of Protocol Status (Requirement Level) .
32 6.10  Obsolete Protocols .
IAB, IETF, and IRTF Contacts .
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)
Request for Comments Editor Contact  .
Network Information Center Contact .
Sources for Requests for Comments  .
39 Introduction A discussion of the standardization process and the RFC document series is presented first, followed by an explanation of the terms.
Sections 6.2 6.10 contain the lists of protocols in each stage of standardization.
Finally are pointers to references and contacts for further information.
This memo is intended to be issued approximately quarterly; please be sure the copy you are reading is current.
Current copies may be obtained from the Network Information Center (INTERNIC) or from the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) (see the contact information at the end of this memo).
Do not use this edition after 15 Jul 95.
See Section 6.1 for a description of recent changes.
The Internet Architecture Board maintains this list of documents that define standards for the Internet protocol suite.
See RFC 1601 for the charter of the IAB and RFC 1160 for an explanation of the role and organization of the IAB and its subsidiary groups, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
Each of these groups has a steering group called the IESG and IRSG, respectively.
The IETF develops these standards with the goal of co ordinating the evolution of the Internet protocols; this co ordination has become quite important as the Internet protocols are increasingly in general commercial use.
The definitive description of the Internet standards process is found in RFC 1602.
The majority of Internet protocol development and standardization activity takes place in the working groups of the IETF.
Protocols which are to become standards in the Internet go through a series of states or maturity levels (proposed standard, draft standard, and standard) involving increasing amounts of scrutiny and testing.
When a protocol completes this process it is assigned a STD number (see RFC 1311).
At each step, the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) of the IETF must make a recommendation for advancement of the protocol.
To allow time for the Internet community to consider and react to standardization proposals, a minimum delay of 6 months before a proposed standard can be advanced to a draft standard and 4 months before a draft standard can be promoted to standard.
It is general practice that no proposed standard can be promoted to draft standard without at least two independent implementations (and the recommendation of the IESG).
Promotion from draft standard to standard generally requires operational experience and demonstrated interoperability of two or more implementations (and the recommendation of the IESG).
In cases where there is uncertainty as to the proper decision concerning a protocol a special review committee may be appointed consisting of experts from the IETF, IRTF and the IAB with the purpose of recommending an explicit action.
Advancement of a protocol to proposed standard is an important step since it marks a protocol as a candidate for eventual standardization (it puts the protocol "on the standards track").
Advancement to draft standard is a major step which warns the community that, unless major objections are raised or flaws are discovered, the protocol is likely to be advanced to standard in six months.
Some protocols have been superseded by better ones or are otherwise unused.
Such protocols are still documented in this memorandum with the designation "historic".
Because it is useful to document the results of early protocol research and development work, some of the RFCs document protocols which are still in an experimental condition.
The protocols are designated "experimental" in this memorandum.
They appear in this report as a convenience to the community and not as evidence of their standardization.
Other protocols, such as those developed by other standards organizations, or by particular vendors, may be of interest or may be recommended for use in the Internet.
The specifications of such protocols may be published as RFCs for the convenience of the Internet community.
These protocols are labeled "informational" in this memorandum.
In addition to the working groups of the IETF, protocol development and experimentation may take place as a result of the work of the research groups of the Internet Research Task Force, or the work of other individuals interested in Internet protocol development.
The the documentation of such experimental work in the RFC series is encouraged, but none of this work is considered to be on the track for standardization until the IESG has made a recommendation to advance the protocol to the proposed standard state.
A few protocols have achieved widespread implementation without the approval of the IESG.
For example, some vendor protocols have become very important to the Internet community even though they have not been recommended by the IESG.
However, the IAB strongly recommends that the standards process be used in the evolution of the protocol suite to maximize interoperability (and to prevent incompatible protocol requirements from arising).
The use of the terms "standard", "draft standard", and "proposed standard" are reserved in any RFC or other publication of Internet protocols to only those protocols which the IESG has approved.
In addition to a state (like "Proposed Standard"), a protocol is also assigned a status, or requirement level, in this document.
The possible requirement levels ("Required", "Recommended", "Elective", "Limited Use", and "Not Recommended") are defined in Section 4.2.
When a protocol is on the standards track, that is in the proposed standard, draft standard, or standard state (see Section 5),
the status shown in Section 6 is the current status.
Few protocols are required to be implemented in all systems; this is because there is such a variety of possible systems, for example, gateways, routers, terminal servers, workstations, and multi user hosts.
The requirement level shown in this document is only a one word label, which may not be sufficient to characterize the implementation requirements for a protocol in all situations.
For some protocols, this document contains an additional status paragraph (an applicability statement).
In addition, more detailed status information may be contained in separate requirements documents (see Section 3).
The Request for Comments Documents
The documents called Request for Comments (or RFCs) are the working notes of the "Network Working Group", that is the Internet research and development community.
A document in this series may be on essentially any topic related to computer communication, and may be anything from a meeting report to the specification of a standard.
All standards are published as RFCs, but not all RFCs specify standards.
Anyone can submit a document for publication as an RFC.
Submissions must be made via electronic mail to the RFC Editor (see the contact information at the end of this memo, and see RFC 1543).
While RFCs are not refereed publications, they do receive technical review from the task forces, individual technical experts, or the RFC Editor, as appropriate.
The RFC series comprises a wide range of documents, ranging from informational documents of general interests to specifications of standard Internet protocols.
In cases where submission is intended to document a proposed standard, draft standard, or standard protocol, the RFC Editor will publish the document only with the approval of the IESG.
For documents describing experimental work, the RFC Editor will notify the IESG before publication, allowing for the possibility of review by the relevant IETF working group or IRTF research group and provide those comments to the author.
See Section 5.1 for more detail.
Once a document is assigned an RFC number and published, that RFC is never revised or re issued with the same number.
There is never a question of having the most recent version of a particular RFC.
However, a protocol (such as File Transfer Protocol (FTP)) may be improved and re documented many times in several different RFCs.
It is important to verify that you have the most recent RFC on a particular protocol.
This "Internet Official Protocol Standards" memo is the reference for determining the correct RFC for the current specification of each protocol.
The RFCs are available from the INTERNIC, and a number of other sites.
For more information about obtaining RFCs, see Sections 7.4 and 7.5.
There are three other reference documents of interest in checking the current status of protocol specifications and standardization.
These are the Assigned Numbers, the Gateway Requirements, and the Host Requirements.
Note that these documents are revised and updated at different times; in case of differences between these documents, the most recent must prevail.
Also, one should be aware of the MIL STD publications on IP, TCP, Telnet, FTP, and SMTP.
These are described in Section 3.4.
The "Assigned Numbers" document lists the assigned values of the parameters used in the various protocols.
For example, IP protocol codes, TCP port numbers, Telnet Option Codes, ARP hardware types, and Terminal Type names.
Assigned Numbers was most recently issued as RFC 1700.
This document reviews the specifications that apply to gateways and supplies guidance and clarification for any ambiguities.
Gateway Requirements is RFC 1009.
A working group of the IETF is actively preparing a revision.
This pair of documents reviews and updates the specifications that apply to hosts, and it supplies guidance and clarification for any ambiguities.
Host Requirements was issued as RFC 1122 and RFC 1123.
The Internet community specifications for IP (RFC 791) and TCP (RFC  793) and the DoD MIL STD specifications are intended to describe exactly the same protocols.
Any difference in the protocols specified by these sets of documents should be reported to DISA and to the IESG.
The RFCs and the MIL STDs for IP and TCP differ in style and level of detail.
It is strongly advised that the two sets of documents be used together, along with RFC 1122 and RFC 1123.
The Internet and the DoD MIL STD specifications for the FTP, SMTP, and Telnet protocols are essentially the same documents (RFCs 765, 821, 854).
The MIL STD versions have been edited slightly.
Note that the current Internet specification for FTP is RFC 959 (as modified by RFC 1123).
Note that these MIL STD are now somewhat out of date.
The Gateway Requirements (RFC 1009) and Host Requirements (RFC 1122, RFC 1123) take precedence over both earlier RFCs and the MIL STDs.
These documents are available from the Naval Publications and Forms Center.
Requests can be initiated by telephone, telegraph, or mail; however, it is preferred that private industry use form DD1425, if possible.
Naval Publications and Forms Center, Code 3015 5801
PA 19120 Phone: 1 215 697 3321 (order tape)
1 215 697 4834 (conversation)
There are two independent categorization of protocols.
The first is the "maturity level" or STATE of standardization, one of "standard", "draft standard", "proposed standard", "experimental", "informational" or "historic".
The second is the "requirement level" or STATUS of this protocol, one of "required", "recommended", "elective", "limited use", or "not recommended".
The status or requirement level is difficult to portray in a one word label.
These status labels should be considered only as an indication, and a further description, or applicability statement, should be consulted.
When a protocol is advanced to proposed standard or draft standard, it is labeled with a current status.
At any given time a protocol occupies a cell of the following matrix.
Protocols are likely to be in cells in about the following proportions (indicated by the relative number of Xs).
A new protocol is most likely to start in the (proposed standard, elective) cell, or the (experimental, not recommended) cell.
S T A T U S Req   Rec   Ele
Some protocols are particular to hosts and some to gateways; a few protocols are used in both.
The definitions of the terms below will refer to a "system" which is either a host or a gateway (or both).
It should be clear from the context of the particular protocol which types of systems are intended.
Every protocol listed in this document is assigned to a "maturity level" or STATE of standardization: "standard", "draft standard", "proposed standard", "experimental", or "historic".
The IESG has established this as an official standard protocol for the Internet.
These protocols are assigned STD numbers (see RFC  1311).
These are separated into two groups: (1) IP protocol and above, protocols that apply to the whole Internet; and (2) network specific protocols, generally specifications of how to do IP on particular types of networks.
The IESG is actively considering this protocol as a possible Standard Protocol.
Substantial and widespread testing and comment are desired.
Comments and test results should be submitted to the IESG.
There is a possibility that changes will be made in a Draft Standard Protocol before it becomes a Standard Protocol.
These are protocol proposals that may be considered by the IESG for standardization in the future.
Implementation and testing by several groups is desirable.
Revision of the protocol specification is likely.
A system should not implement an experimental protocol unless it is participating in the experiment and has coordinated its use of the protocol with the developer of the protocol.
Typically, experimental protocols are those that are developed as part of an ongoing research project not related to an operational service offering.
While they may be proposed as a service protocol at a later stage, and thus become proposed standard, draft standard, and then standard protocols, the designation of a protocol as experimental may sometimes be meant to suggest that the protocol, although perhaps mature, is not intended for operational use.
Informational Protocol Protocols developed by other standard organizations, or vendors, or that are for other reasons outside the purview of the IESG, may be published as RFCs for the convenience of the Internet community as informational protocols.
These are protocols that are unlikely to ever become standards in the Internet either because they have been superseded by later developments or due to lack of interest.
This document lists a "requirement level" or STATUS for each protocol.
The status is one of "required", "recommended", "elective", "limited use", or "not recommended".
A system must implement the required protocols.
Recommended Protocol A system should implement the recommended protocols.
Elective Protocol A system may or may not implement an elective protocol.
The general notion is that if you are going to do something like this, you must do exactly this.
There may be several elective protocols in a general area, for example, there are several electronic mail protocols, and several routing protocols.
These protocols are for use in limited circumstances.
This may be because of their experimental state, specialized nature, limited functionality, or historic state.
These protocols are not recommended for general use.
This may be because of their limited functionality, specialized nature, or experimental or historic state.
The Standards Track This section discusses in more detail the procedures used by the RFC Editor and the IESG in making decisions about the labeling and publishing of protocols as standards.
The RFC Processing Decision Table
Here is the current decision table for processing submissions by the RFC Editor.
The processing depends on who submitted it, and the status they want it to have.
Inform the source of the rules.
RFCs specifying Standard, or Draft Standard must come from the IESG, only.
(3) Refer to an Area Director for review by a WG.
Expect to see the document again only after approval by the IESG.
(4) Notify both the IESG and IRSG.
If no concerns are raised in two weeks then do Discretion (5), else RFC Editor to resolve the concerns or do Refer (3).
The RFC Editor decides if a review is needed and if so by whom.
RFC Editor decides to publish or not.
Of course, in all cases the RFC Editor can request or make minor changes for style, format, and presentation purposes.
The IESG has designated the IESG Secretary as its agent for forwarding documents with IESG approval and for registering concerns in response to notifications (4) to the RFC Editor.
Documents from Area Directors or Working Group Chairs may be considered in the same way as documents from "other".
There is a part of the STATUS and STATE categorization that is called the standards track.
Actually, only the changes of state are significant to the progression along the standards track, though the status assignments may change as well.
The states illustrated by single line boxes are temporary states, those illustrated by double line boxes are long term states.
A protocol will normally be expected to remain in a temporary state for several months (minimum six months for proposed standard, minimum four months for draft standard).
A protocol may be in a long term state for many years.
A protocol may enter the standards track only on the recommendation of the IESG; and may move from one state to another along the track only on the recommendation of the IESG.
That is, it takes action by the IESG to either start a protocol on the track or to move it along.
Generally, as the protocol enters the standards track a decision is made as to the eventual STATUS, requirement level or applicability (elective, recommended, or required)
the protocol will have, although a somewhat less stringent current status may be assigned, and it then is placed in the the proposed standard STATE with that status.
So the initial placement of a protocol is into state 1.
At any time the STATUS decision may be revisited.
The transition from proposed standard (1) to draft standard (2) can only be by action of the IESG and only after the protocol has been proposed standard (1) for at least six months.
The transition from draft standard (2) to standard (3) can only be by action of the IESG and only after the protocol has been draft standard (2) for at least four months.
Occasionally, the decision may be that the protocol is not ready for standardization and will be assigned to the experimental state (4).
This is off the standards track, and the protocol may be resubmitted to enter the standards track after further work.
There are other paths into the experimental and historic states that do not involve IESG action.
Sometimes one protocol is replaced by another and thus becomes historic, or it may happen that a protocol on the standards track is in a sense overtaken by another protocol (or other events) and becomes historic (state 5).
The Protocols Subsection 6.1 lists recent RFCs and other changes.
Subsections 6.2 6.10 list the standards in groups by protocol state.
1786 Representation of IP Routing Policies in a Routing Registry (ripe 81 )
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
1785 TFTP Option Negotiation Analysis
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
1784 TFTP Timeout Interval and Transfer Size Options A Proposed Standard protocol.
1783 TFTP Blocksize Option A Proposed Standard protocol.
1782 TFTP Option Extension A Proposed Standard protocol.
Using the OSI Directory to Achieve User Friendly Naming A Proposed Standard protocol.
A String Representation of Distinguished Names A Draft Standard protocol.
The String Representation of Standard Attribute Syntaxes A Draft Standard protocol.
1777 Lightweight Directory Access Protocol A Draft Standard protocol.
"On" the Internet This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
1774 BGP 4 Protocol Analysis
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
1773 Experience with the BGP 4 protocol
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
1772 Application of the Border Gateway Protocol in the Internet A Draft Standard protocol.
A Border Gateway Protocol 4
1770 IPv4 Option for Sender Directed Multi Destination Delivery
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP)
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Host Group Extensions for CLNP Multicasting An Experimental protocol.
1767 MIME Encapsulation of EDI Objects A Proposed Standard protocol.
Tags for the Identification of Languages A Proposed Standard protocol.
1765 OSPF Database Overflow An Experimental protocol.
The PPP XNS IDP Control Protocol (XNSCP)
The PPP Banyan Vines Control Protocol (BVCP)
The PPP DECnet Phase IV Control Protocol (DNCP)
1761 Snoop Version 2 Packet Capture File Format
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
The S/KEY One Time Password System
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Printer MIB A Proposed Standard protocol.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
1757 Remote Network Monitoring Management Information Base A Draft Standard protocol.
1755 ATM Signaling Support for IP over ATM A Proposed Standard protocol.
1754 IP over ATM Working Group's Recommendations for the ATM Forum's Multiprotocol
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Technical Requirements Of the Nimrod Routing and Addressing Architecture
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
The Recommendation for the IP
Next Generation Protocol A Proposed Standard protocol.
A Convention for Human Readable 128 bit Keys
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
IEEE 802.5 Station Source Routing MIB using SMIv2 A Proposed Standard protocol.
802.5 MIB using SMIv2 A Draft Standard protocol.
1747 Definitions of Managed Objects for SNA Data Link Control (SDLC) using SMIv2 A Proposed Standard protocol.
1746 Ways to Define User Expectations
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
1745 BGP4/IDRP for IP OSPF Interaction A Proposed Standard protocol.
1744 Observations on the Management of the Internet Address Space
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
802.5 MIB using SMIv2 A Draft Standard protocol.
AppleTalk Management Information Base II A Proposed Standard protocol.
1741 MIME Content Type for BinHex Encoded Files
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
1740 MIME Encapsulation of Macintosh Files MacMIME A Proposed Standard protocol.
A Primer On Internet and
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Functional Requirements for Uniform Resource Names
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Functional Recommendations for Internet Resource Locators
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
1735 NBMA Address Resolution Protocol (NARP)
POP3 AUTHentication command A Proposed Standard protocol.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Authentication Mechanisms A Proposed Standard protocol.
Internet Message Access Protocol Version 4
Using the Z39.50 Information Retrieval Protocol
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard. 1728
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
A Vision of an Integrated Internet Information Service
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
Technical Criteria for Choosing IP The Next Generation (IPng)
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
This is an information document and does not specify any level of standard.
The following are changes to protocols listed in the previous edition.
1657 Definitions of Managed Objects for the Fourth Version of the Border Gateway Protocol
(BGP 4) using SMIv2904 Exterior Gateway Protocol Elevated to Draft Standard.
Gateway Requirements Moved to Historic.
17 NETBIOS    NetBIOS Service Protocols
Quote of the Day Protocol
51 PPP HDLC   PPP in HDLC Framing
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
The Internet Architecture Board intends to move towards general adoption of IP multicasting, as a more efficient solution than broadcasting for many applications.
The host interface has been standardized in RFC 1112; however, multicast routing gateways are in the experimental stage and are not widely available.
An Internet host should support all of RFC 1112, except for the IGMP protocol itself which is optional; see RFC 1122 for more details.
Even without IGMP, implementation of RFC 1112 will provide an important advance: IP layer access to local network multicast addressing.
It is expected that IGMP will become recommended for all hosts and gateways at some future date.
The Internet Architecture Board recommends that all IP and TCP implementations be network manageable.
At the current time, this implies implementation of the Internet MIB II (RFC 1213), and at least the recommended management protocol SNMP (RFC 1157).
The Routing Information Protocol (RIP) is widely implemented and used in the Internet.
However, both implementors and users should be aware that RIP has some serious technical limitations as a routing protocol.
The IETF is currently devpeloping several candidates for a new standard "open" routing protocol with better properties than RIP.
The IAB urges the Internet community to track these developments, and to implement the new protocol when it is standardized; improved Internet service will result for many users.
As OSI protocols become more widely implemented and used, there will be an increasing need to support interoperation with the TCP/IP protocols.
The Internet Engineering Task Force is formulating strategies for interoperation.
RFC 1006 provides one interoperation mode, in which TCP/IP is used to emulate TP0 in order to support OSI applications.
Hosts that wish to run OSI connection oriented applications in this mode should use the procedure described in RFC  1006.
In the future, the IAB expects that a major portion of the Internet will support both TCP/IP and OSI (inter )network protocols in parallel, and it will then be possible to run OSI applications across the Internet using full OSI protocol "stacks".
All Network Specific Standards have Elective status.
1490 ATM ENCAP  Multiprotocol Encapsulation over ATM
IP Multicast over Token Ring LANs
Prop   1469 IP FDDI    Transmission of IP and ARP over FDDI
36 IP HIPPI   IP and ARP on HIPPI
Internet Protocol on IEEE 802
46 IP SLIP    Transmission of IP over Serial Lines
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
Applicability Statements: It is expected that a system will support one or more physical networks and for each physical network supported the appropriate protocols from the above list must be supported.
That is, it is elective to support any particular type of physical network, and for the physical networks actually supported it is required that they be supported exactly according to the protocols in the above list.
See also the Host and Gateway Requirements RFCs for more specific information on network specific ("link layer") protocols.
X.500syn   X.500 String Representation ...
BGP 4 MIB  BGP 4 MIB
SMTP Service Ext or 8bit MIMEtransport
Guidelines for OSI NSAP Allocation
Open Shortest Path First Routing V2
ISO TS ECHO Echo for ISO 8473
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
Applicability Statements: PPP   Point to Point Protocol is a method of sending IP over serial lines, which are a type of physical network.
It is anticipated that PPP will be advanced to the network specifics standard protocol state in the future.
TFTP Blk   TFTP Blocksize Option
OSI User Friendly Naming ...
Lang Tag   Tags for Identification of Languages
PPP XNS IDP Control Protocol
ATM SIG    ATM Signaling Support for IP over ATM
802.5 SSR MIB using SMIv2
BGP4/IDRP  BGP4/IDRP for IP/OSPF Interaction
MacMIME    MIME Encapsulation of Macintosh files
POP3 AUTH  POP3 AUTHentication command
Internet Message Access Protocol V4
MIB  Modem MIB using SMIv2
ATM Management Version 8.0 using
SNANAU MIB SNA NAUs MIB using
Extensions to RIP to Support Demand Cir.
X500 MIB   X.500 Directory Monitoring
CON MD5    Content MD5 Header Field
MIB   FDDI Management Information Base
KERBEROS   Kerberos Network Authentication Ser (V5)
SNMP MIB Extension for X.25 Packet Layer
SNMP MIB Extension for X.25 LAPB
X.400 1988 to 1984 downgrading
MIB  Management Information Base for Frame
Border Gateway Protocol MIB (Version 3)
STD MIBs   Reassignment of Exp MIBs to Std
Extensions to the Generic Interface
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
OSPF RFC 1370 is an applicability statement for OSPF.
, all the Telnet Options are collected here with both their state and status.
Remote Controlled Trans and Echo    7
Output Carriage Return Disposition 10
Output Vertical Tab Disposition    15
727 TOPT BYTE  Byte Macro
Prop  Ele    1041 TOPT X.3
Prop  Ele    1073 TOPT TS
TOPT ENVIR Telnet Environment Option
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
All Experimental protocols have the Limited Use status.
Remote Write ProtocolL Version 1.0
DNS DEBUG  Tools for DNS
TCP HIPER  TCP Extensions for High Performance
Digest Message Format for Mail
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
Informational Protocols Information protocols have no status.
1706 RADIO PAGE TPC.INT Subdomain:
OSI HYPER  OSI and LLC1 on HYPERchannel
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
All Historic protocols have Not Recommended status.
802.4 MIP  IEEE 802.4 Token Bus MIB
an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
Some of the protocols listed in this memo are described in RFCs that are obsoleted by newer RFCs.
"Obsolete" or "obsoleted" is not an official state or status of protocols.
This subsection is for information only.
While it may seem to be obviously wrong to have an obsoleted RFC in the list of standards, there may be cases when an older standard is in the process of being replaced.
This process may take a year or two.
For example, the Network Time Protocol (NTP) [RFC 1119] is in its version 2 a full Standard, and in its version 3 is a Draft Standard [RFC 1305].
Once version 3 is a full Standard, version 2 will be made Historic.
Many obsoleted protocols are of little interest and are dropped from this memo altogether.
Some obsoleted protocols have received enough recognition that it seems appropriate to list them under their current status and with the following reference to their current replacement.
Network Time Protocol (Version 2) 1533 obsoletes 1497
Draft/Rec  Bootstrap Protocol 1331 obsoletes 1171
Draft/Ele  Point to Point Protocol 1574 obsoletes 1139
Echo for ISO 8473 1573 obsoletes 1229
IF MIB 1559 obsoletes 1289
Point to Point Protocol (PPP)
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol 1592 obsoletes 1228
Exper/Lim  SNMP Distributed Program Interface 1528
Exper/Lim  An Experiment in Remote Printing 1320 obsoletes 1186
MD4 Message Digest Algorithm 1057
Version 1 1421 obsoletes 1113
Key Management 1423 obsoletes 1115
Border Gateway Protocol 1268 obsoletes 1164
Thanks to Lynn Wheeler of Britton Lee for compiling the information in this subsection.
[Note: an asterisk at the end of a line indicates a change from the previous edition of this document.]
IAB, IETF, and IRTF Contacts 7.1.1.
Contact Please send your comments about this list of protocols and especially about the Draft Standard Protocols to the Internet Architecture Board care of Abel Winerib, IAB Executive Director.
Abel Winerib Executive Director of the IAB Intel, JF2 64 2111 NE 25th Avenue Hillsboro,
OR 97124 1 503 696 8972 AWeinrib@ibeam.jf.intel.com
Christian Huitema Chair of the IAB
INRIA, Sophia Antipolis 2004 Route des Lucioles BP 109 F 06561
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF
Paul Mockapetris Chair of the IETF USC/Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA 90292 6695 1 310 822 1511 pvm@ISI.EDU
Steve Coya IESG Secretary Corporation for National Research Initiatives 1895
Preston White Drive, Suite 100 Reston, VA 22091 1
Steve Coya Executive Director of the IETF Corporation for National Research Initiatives 1895
Preston White Drive, Suite 100 Reston, VA 22091 1
Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)
Abel Winerib Chair of the IRTF Intel, JF2 64 2111 NE 25th Avenue Hillsboro, OR 97124 1 503 696 8972
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority Contact Contact:
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority USC/Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA  90292 6695 1 310 822 1511 IANA@ISI.EDU
The protocol standards are managed by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority.
Please refer to the document "Assigned Numbers" (RFC 1700) for further information about the status of protocol documents.
There are two documents that summarize the requirements for host and gateways in the Internet, "Host Requirements" (RFC 1122 and RFC 1123) and "Gateway Requirements" (RFC 1009).
How to obtain the most recent edition of this "Internet Official Protocol Standards" memo: The file "in notes/std/std1.txt" may be copied via FTP from the FTP.ISI.EDU computer using the FTP username "anonymous" and FTP password "guest".
Request for Comments Editor Contact Contact:
Jon Postel RFC Editor USC/Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA  90292 6695 1
310 822 1511 RFC Editor@ISI.EDU Documents may be submitted via electronic mail to the RFC Editor for consideration for publication as RFC.
If you are not familiar with the format or style requirements please request the "Instructions for RFC Authors".
In general, the style of any recent RFC may be used as a guide.
The Network Information Center and Requests for Comments Distribution Contact RFC's may be obtained from DS.INTERNIC.NET via FTP, WAIS, and electronic mail.
Through FTP, RFC's are stored as rfc/rfcnnnn.txt or rfc/rfcnnnn.ps where 'nnnn' is the RFC number.
Login as "anonymous" and provide your e mail address as the password.
Through WAIS, you may use either your local WAIS client or telnet to DS.INTERNIC.NET and login as "wais" (no password required) to access a WAIS client.
information and a tutorial for using WAIS are available online.
The WAIS database to search is "rfcs".
Directory and Database Services also provides a mail server interface.
Send a mail message to mailserv@ds.internic.net and include any of the following commands in the message body: document by name rfcnnnn
where 'nnnn' is the RFC number
The text version is sent.
where 'nnnn' is the RFC number.
The InterNIC directory and database services collection of resource listings, internet documents such as RFCs, FYIs, STDs, and Internet Drafts, and publicly accessible databases are also now available via Gopher.
All our collections are WAIS indexed and can be searched from the Gopher menu.
To access the InterNIC Gopher Servers, please connect to "internic.net" port 70.
Sources for Requests for Comments Details on many sources of RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending an EMAIL message to "rfc info@ISI.EDU" with the message body "help: ways to get rfcs".
For example: To: rfc info@ISI.EDU Subject: getting rfcs help: ways to get rfcs 8.  Security Considerations Security issues are not addressed in this memo.
Author's Address Jon Postel USC/Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
310 823 6714 Email: Postel@ISI.EDU
