NETWORK HOST STATUS This RFC reports on the status of most Network Hosts from March 27 to April 7.
During this interval the PDP 10 at Ames which acts as a front end to the Illiac (Network address 15) became a server.
However, this Host will not be available to general use for several months.
Also a Terminal IMP was installed at the University of Southern California (Network Address 23) on March 29.
Several Hosts are currently excluded from the daily testing.
These Host fall into two categories:
1) Hosts which are not expected to be functioning on the Network as servers (available for use from other sites) on a regular basis for at least two weeks.
Included here are the Terminal IMPs, which are presently in the Network (AMES, MITRE, NBS, ETAC, USC, and BBN ).
This category also includes the Network Control Center computer (Network Address 5) which is used solely for gathering statistics from the Network.
Finally, included among these Hosts are the following:
The tables on the next two pages summarize the Host status for this period.
The BBN Terminal IMP (Network Address 158) is a prototype and as such is frequently not connected to the Network, but being used to refine and debug the Terminal IMP programs.
(Destination Host either dead or inaccessible [due to network partitioning or local IMP failure] from the BBN Terminal IMP.)
H   1/2 Open (Destination Host opened a connection but then either immediately closed it, or did not respond any further.)
(Destination Host opened a connection and was accessible to users.)
(Destination Host returned a CLS to the initial RFC.)
(Destination Host did not complete the ICP and open a connection within 60 seconds.)
The only service currently offered by the UCLA IBM 360/91 is a Network Job Service (NETRJS), however, the BBN Terminal IMP is not equipped to test NETRJS.
We are assuming that initial connection to the NETRJS logger indicates that NETRJS is also functioning.
#These sites advertise that they may not have their system available at these times.
The NMC is a research site and would like to have prior arrangement with each user.
[ This RFC was put into machine readable form for entry ]
[ into the online RFC archives by BBN Corp. under the   ]
[ direction of Alex McKenzie.
