This RFC reports on the status of most Network Hosts from December 6 to December 18.
Due to hardware debugging, the BBN prototype Terminal IMP (Network Address 158) was unavailable for most of the two weeks from November 22 to December 6.
There was, therefore, no Host status reports for that period.
Several Hosts are currently excluded from the daily testing.
These Hosts fall into two categories: 1) Hosts which are not expected to be functioning on the Network as servers (available for use from other sites) on a regular basis for at least two weeks.
Included here are the Terminal IMPs, which are presently in the Network (AMES, MITRE, NBS and BBN ).
This category also includes the Network Control Center Computer (Network Address 5) which is used solely for gathering statistics from the Network.
Finally, included among these Hosts are the following:
The NBS Terminal IMP (Network Address 147) was installed in Washington at the beginning of December.
The tables on the next two pages summarize the Host status for this period.
The BBN Terminal IMP (Network Address 158) is a prototype and as such is frequently not connected to the Network, but being used to refine and debug the Terminal IMP programs.
(Destination Host either dead or inaccessible [due to network partitioning or local IMP failure] from the BBN Terminal IMP.)
H   1/2 Open (Destination Host opened a connection but then either immediately closed it, or did not respond any further.)
(Destination Host opened a connection and was accessible to users.)
(Destination Host returned a CLS to the initial RFC.)
(Destination Host did not complete the ICP and open a connection within 60 seconds.)
The only service currently offered by the UCLA IBM 360/91 is a Network Job Service (NETRJS); however, the BBN Terminal IMP is not equipped to test NETJRS.
We are assuming that initial connection to the NETRJS logger indicates that NETJRS is also functioning.
# These sites advertise that they may not have their systems available at these times.
now, Telnet in April   Bob Braden 2    SRI (NIC)
John Melvin 66    SRI (AI)
Barry Wessler  5    BBN (NCC)
