Abstract This document defines an RTP Control Protocol (RTCP)
Extended Report (XR) block that allows the reporting of burst and gap discard metrics for use in a range of RTP applications.
This document defines a new block type to augment those defined in [RFC3611] for use in a range of RTP applications.
The new block type supports the reporting of the proportion of packets discarded by the jitter buffer at the receiver, using packet discard logic according to the jitter buffer algorithms.
The discards during discard bursts are reported, together with the number of bursts.
This block is intended to be used in conjunction with [RFC7002], which provides the total packets discarded and on which this block therefore depends.
However, the metric in [RFC7002] may be used independently of the metrics in this block.
This block provides information on transient IP problems.
Burst/gap metrics are typically used in cumulative reports; however, they also may be used in interval reports (see the Interval Metric flag in Section 3.2).
The burstiness of packet discard affects user experience, may influence any sender strategies to mitigate the problem, and may also have diagnostic value.
The metric belongs to the class of transport related end system metrics defined in [RFC6792].
The definitions of "burst", "gap", "loss", and "discard" are consistent with the definitions in [RFC3611].
To accommodate the range of jitter buffer algorithms and packet discard logic that may be used by implementors, the method used to distinguish between bursts and gaps shall use an equivalent method to that defined in Section 4.7.2 of [RFC3611].
Note that reporting the specific jitter buffer algorithms and/or packet discard logic is out of the scope of this document.
RTCP and RTCP Extended Reports
The use of RTCP for reporting is defined in [RFC3550].
[RFC3611] defined an extensible structure for reporting using an RTCP Extended Report (XR).
This document defines a new Extended Report block for use with [RFC3550] and [RFC3611].
The Performance Metrics Framework [RFC6390] provides guidance on the definition and specification of performance metrics.
The RTP Monitoring Framework [RFC6792] provides guidelines for reporting block format using RTCP XR.
The metrics block described in this document is in accordance with the guidelines in [RFC6390] and [RFC6792].
Applicability These metrics are applicable to a range of RTP applications that contain de jitter buffers
[RFC5481] at the receiving end to smooth variation in packet arrival time and don't use stream repair means, e.g., Forward Error Correction (FEC)
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
In addition, the following terms are defined: Received, Lost, and Discarded
A packet shall be regarded as "lost" if it fails to arrive within an implementation specific time window.
A packet that arrives within this time window but is too early to be played out, too late to be played out, or thrown away before playout due to packet duplication or redundancy shall be regarded as discarded.
A packet shall not be regarded as discarded if it arrives within this time window but is dropped during decoding by some higher  layer decoder, e.g., due to a decoding error.
A packet shall be classified as one of received (or OK), discarded, or lost.
The metric "cumulative number of packets lost" defined in [RFC3550] reports a count of packets lost from the media stream (single synchronization source (SSRC) within a single RTP session).
Similarly, the metric "number of packets discarded" defined in [RFC7002] reports a count of packets discarded from the media stream (single SSRC within a single RTP session) arriving at the receiver.
Another metric, defined in [RFC5725], is available to report on packets that are not recovered by any repair techniques that may be in use.
Note that the term "discard" defined here builds on the "discard" definition in [RFC3611] but extends the concept to take into account packet duplication and reports different types of discard counts [RFC7002].
The terms "burst" and "gap" are used in a manner consistent with that of RTCP XR [RFC3611].
RTCP XR views an RTP stream as being divided into bursts, which are periods during which the discard rate is high enough to cause noticeable quality degradation (generally over 5 percent discard rate), and gaps, which are periods during which discarded packets are infrequent and hence quality is generally acceptable.
Burst/Gap Discard Metrics Block Metrics in this block report on burst/gap discard in the stream arriving at the RTP system.
Measurements of these metrics are made at the receiving end of the RTP stream.
Instances of this metrics block use the synchronization source (SSRC) to refer to the separate auxiliary Measurement Information Block [RFC6776], which describes measurement periods in use (see [RFC6776], Section 4.2).
This metrics block relies on the measurement period in the Measurement Information Block indicating the span of the report.
Senders MUST send this block in the same compound RTCP packet as the Measurement Information Block.
Receivers MUST verify that the measurement period is received in the same compound RTCP packet as this metrics block.
If not, this metrics block MUST be discarded.
The structure of the Burst/Gap Discard Metrics Block is as follows.
Definition of Fields in Burst/Gap Discard Metrics Block Block Type (BT): 8 bits
A Burst/Gap Discard Metrics Block is identified by the constant 20.
Interval Metric flag (I): 2 bits This field is used to indicate whether the burst/gap discard metrics are Sampled, Interval, or Cumulative metrics [RFC6792]: I 10:
Interval Duration the reported value applies to the most recent measurement interval duration between successive metrics reports.
the reported value applies to the accumulation period characteristic of cumulative measurements.
the reported value is a sampled instantaneous value.
In this document, burst/gap discard metrics can only be measured over definite intervals and cannot be sampled.
Also, the value I 00 is reserved for future use.
Senders MUST NOT use the values I 00
If a block is received with I 00
, the receiver MUST discard the block.
: 6 bits These bits are reserved.
They MUST be set to zero by senders and ignored by receivers (see [RFC6709], Section 4.2).
The length of this report block in 32 bit words, minus one.
For the Burst/Gap Discard Metrics Block, the block length is equal to 3.
The block MUST be discarded if the block length is set to a different value.
SSRC of Source: 32 bits As defined in Section 4.1 of [RFC3611].
Threshold: 8 bits The Threshold is equivalent to Gmin in [RFC3611], i.e., the number of successive packets that must not be discarded prior to and following a discard packet in order for this discarded packet to be regarded as part of a gap.
Note that the Threshold is set in accordance with the Gmin calculation defined in Section 4.7.2 of [RFC3611].
Packets Discarded in Bursts: 24 bits
The total number of packets discarded during discard bursts.
The measured value is unsigned value.
If the measured value exceeds 0xFFFFFD, the value 0xFFFFFE MUST be reported to indicate an over range measurement.
If the measurement is unavailable, the value 0xFFFFFF MUST be reported.
Total Packets Expected in Bursts: 24 bits
The total number of packets expected during discard bursts (that is, the sum of received packets and lost packets).
The measured value is unsigned value.
If the measured value exceeds 0xFFFFFD, the value 0xFFFFFE MUST be reported to indicate an over range measurement.
If the measurement is unavailable, the value 0xFFFFFF MUST be reported.
Reserved: 8 bits These bits are reserved.
They MUST be set to zero by senders and ignored by receivers (See [RFC6709], Section 4.2).
3.3.  Derived Metrics Based on Reported Metrics
The metrics described here are intended to be used in conjunction with information from the Measurement Information Block [RFC6776] and also with the metric "number of packets discarded" provided in the RTCP XR Discard Count Metrics Block [RFC7002].
These metrics provide the following information relevant to statistical parameters, including:  The fraction of packets discarded during bursts (Burst Discard Rate in [RFC7004]), which can be calculated using the metric "Packets Discarded in Bursts" and the metric "Total Packets Expected in Bursts" provided in the Burst/Gap Discard Metrics Block.
The fraction of packets discarded during gaps (Gap Discard Rate in [RFC7004]), which can be calculated using the metric "Packets Discarded in Bursts" and the metric "Total Packets Expected in Bursts" provided in the Burst/Gap Discard Metrics Block.
The details on calculation these parameters in the metrics are described in [RFC7004].
Considerations for Voice over IP Applications
This metrics block is applicable to a broad range of RTP applications.
Where the metric is used with a Voice over IP (VoIP) application and the stream repair means is not available, the following considerations apply.
RTCP XR views a call as being divided into bursts, which are periods during which the discard rate is high enough to cause noticeable call quality degradation (generally over 5 percent discard rate) and gaps, which are periods during which discarded packets are infrequent and hence call quality is generally acceptable.
If voice activity detection is used, the burst and gap duration shall be determined as if silence packets had been sent, i.e., a period of silence in excess of Gmin packets will terminate a burst condition.
The recommended value for the threshold Gmin in [RFC3611] results in a burst being a period of time during which the call quality is degraded to a similar extent to a typical pulse code modulation (PCM) severely errored second.
SDP Signaling [RFC3611] defines the use of SDP (Session Description Protocol)
[RFC4566] for signaling the use of XR blocks.
XR blocks MAY be used without prior signaling.
SDP rtcp xr Attribute Extension
This section augments the SDP [RFC4566] attribute "rtcp xr" defined in [RFC3611] by providing an additional value of "xr format" to signal the use of the report block defined in this document.
The ABNF [RFC5234] syntax is as follows.
/ xr bgd block xr bgd block
When SDP is used in Offer/Answer context, the SDP Offer/Answer usage defined in [RFC3611] for unilateral "rtcp xr" attribute parameters applies.
For detailed usage in Offer/Answer for unilateral parameters, refer to Section 5.2 of [RFC3611].
IANA Considerations New block types for RTCP XR are subject to IANA registration.
For general guidelines on IANA considerations for RTCP XR, refer to [RFC3611].
New RTCP XR Block Type Value
This document assigns the block type value 20 in the IANA "RTP Control Protocol Extended Reports (RTCP XR) Block Type Registry" to the "Burst/Gap Discard Metrics Block".
New RTCP XR SDP Parameter
This document also registers a new parameter "burst gap discard" in the "RTP Control Protocol Extended Reports (RTCP XR) Session Description Protocol (SDP) Parameters Registry".
The contact information for the registrations is: Qin Wu (sunseawq@huawei.com) 101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District Nanjing,
It is believed that this RTCP XR block introduces no new security considerations beyond those described in [RFC3611].
This block does not provide per packet statistics, so the risk to confidentiality documented in Section 7, paragraph 3 of [RFC3611] does not apply.
Contributors Geoff Hunt wrote the initial draft of this document.
Appendix A.  Metrics Represented Using the Template from RFC 6390 a.
Burst/Gap Discard Threshold in RTP Metric
Burst/gap discard threshold in RTP    Metric Description:
The Threshold is equivalent to Gmin in [RFC3611], i.e., the number of successive packets that must not be discarded prior to and following a discard packet in order for this discarded packet to be regarded as part of a gap.
Method of Measurement or Calculation: See Section 3.2, Threshold definition.
: See Section 3.2, Threshold definition.
Measurement Point(s) with Potential Measurement Domain
: See Section 3, 1st paragraph.
See Section 3, 2nd paragraph for measurement timing and Section 3.2 for Interval Metric flag.
Packets Discarded in Bursts Metric
RTP packets discarded in bursts    Metric Description: The total number of RTP packets discarded during discard bursts.
Method of Measurement or Calculation: See Section 3.2, Packets Discarded in Bursts definition.
: See Section 3.2, Packets Discarded in Bursts definition.
Measurement Point(s) with Potential Measurement Domain
: See Section 3, 1st paragraph.
See Section 3, 2nd paragraph for measurement timing and Section 3.2 for Interval Metric flag.
Total Packets Expected in Discard Bursts Metric
Total RTP packets expected in discard bursts    Metric Description: The total number of packets expected during discard bursts (that is, the sum of received packets and lost packets).
Method of Measurement or Calculation:
See Section 3.2, Total Packets Expected in Bursts definition.
: See Section 3.2, Total Packets Expected in Bursts definition.
Measurement Point(s) with Potential Measurement Domain
: See Section 3, 1st paragraph.
See Section 3, 2nd paragraph for measurement timing and Section 3.2 for Interval Metric flag.
