The Survey Database Every twenty minutes, DMS's program SURVEY wakes up and performs the initial connection protocol from the PDP 10 at DMS to the logger socket (socket 1) of each 28 network hosts.
SURVEY records a date time, host, status,and response time for each host.
A host may be in one of these states: undetermined or not surveyed disconnect from the network or dead network control program not responding ICP to logger aborted by the host ICP to logger timed out by SURVEY after 20 seconds logger available and responding within 20 seconds SURVEY records response times responding in tenths of seconds.
When the data for all 28 hosts has been assembled, SURVEY transmits that data to CCA's datacomputer.
If for some reason the datacomputer cannot accept the information, it is held at DMS and sent another time.
The datacomputer's survey database is inverted by host, status, month, and year.
That is to say that the datacomputer maintains several indices to records of one attempt to establish a full duplex connection to one host's logger: it maintains one such index for each host, one for each status, one for each month, and one for each year.
The datacomputer can select records that are specified in boolean expressions by performing boolean operations on the inversion, and without consulting the data itself.
The inversion thus facilitates rapid interaction between the survey retrieval program described below and the survey database at the datacomputer.
SURVEY expresses the record of each attempt to access one host in 17 ASCII characters.
The record of one survey then occupies 17   28   476 characters, and each day the datacomputer receives 3   24
: Retrieving Survey Data A Program called SURRET, written at DMS in the language MUDDLE, allows one to selectively retrieve material from the survey data base stored at the datacomputer [3].
Its user may specify values, groups of values, or, where appropriate, upper and lower bounds for values of each of five fields: host name, date, time, response time, and host status.
In addition, one may request that all five fields or any subset of the five be retrieved.
A sample interaction with SURRET is reproduced below.
The remainder was typed by the system.
The phrases in quotation marks are, effectively, SURRET prompts.
The column headings and table were formatted by SURRET using figures retrieved from the datacomputer.
SURRET generates datalanguage, sends it to the datacomputer, and processes systems diagnostics and data sent to it from the datacomputer.
The datalanguage generated for the foregoing SURRET request
WITH ((YEAR EQ '73' AND MONTH EQ '08' AND DAY EQ '05')
AND (HRMIN GE '2000' AND HRMIN LE '2400')
The field names in the datalanguage were entered with file descriptors before the first data was loaded.
One can ask SURRET to retrieve new data by changing the values of any number of fields and issuing a new REQ (request).
The command <state> displays current values for the five prospective retrieval criteria.
() DATE: (AUG 5 73)
000 2244    LOGGER NOT AVAILABLE (DEAD)   000 2304
" We might have retrieved all of the foregoing output with: <HOST (CASE 10 OR USC 44)
Moreover, <HOST (CASE 10 CCA OR USC 44)> would cause SURRET to access the database twice, once for information about Case 10, and then a second time for information about the remaining two hosts.
Detailed Survey data from July 10, 1973 forward is available either directly from the datacomputer or through SURRET.
Persons who wish to use the datacomputer directly may obtain the pertinent documents through the NIC or by contacting Dale Stern at CCA (617 491 3670).
An overview of the data computer is given in Thomas Marill, The Datacomputer, 18 Oct '71, 7pp.
A detailed study of the programming language for addressing the datacomputer is found in Computer Corporation of America, Datacomputer Project Working Paper
3, Datalanguage, 29 Oct '71
The current status of the language is reviewed in Richard Winter, Specifications for Datalanguage, Version 0/9, 6 Jun '73, 36 pp.
A user's manual for version 0/9, will be released by CCA in September, 1973.
[2] SURVEY is described in Abhay Bhushan, A Report on the Survey Project, 22 June '73 (NIC 17375).
A detailed discussion of SURRET is found in Safwan Bengelloun, MUDDLE Survey Data Retrieval Programs, an internal DMS memo of 14 June, '73.
Our purpose here is to describe enough of the program's syntax and structure to show how it interacts with the datacomputer.
