This specification defines a number of additional link relation types that can used for a range of purposes in a variety of applications types.
The fundamental model for web links and the "Link Relations" registry are established by [RFC5988].
This specification defines and adds the following additional link relation types to the registry: "about", "preview", "privacy policy", "terms of service", and "type".
"about" The "about" link relation can be used to refer to a resource that is the subject or topic of the link's context.
Multiple subjects can be indicated through the use of multiple "about" link relations.
For example, if the context resource is a review about a particular product, the "about" link can be used to reference the URL of the product: HTTP/1.1 200
"preview" The "preview" link relation can be used to refer to a resource that serves as a preview of the link's context, likely with reduced quality or limited content.
For instance, the preview link might reference a screen capture of a video, a brief snippet of audio from a song, or a thumbnail representation of an image.
For example, issuing an HTTP HEAD request to a URI representing a large video or image file might return a link to a short or lower  quality preview of the original: HTTP/1.1 200
OK Content Text: video/mpeg Link: <http://example.org/preview/10 second preview.mpg>; rel "preview"; type "video/mpeg" 4.
"privacy policy" The "privacy policy" link relation can be used to refer to a resource describing the privacy policy associated with the link's context.
The privacy policy can be any resource that discloses what personal information about the user is collected and how that personal information is stored, used, managed, and disclosed to other parties.
For example, an HTTP server that collects personal information about a user throughout the course of the user's interaction with the service can include "privacy policy" links within all HTTP responses using any combination of Link headers or links embedded in the response payload: HTTP/1.1 200
Note that in the absence of clear legal obligations placed on an entity, either through contract or law, the presence of a "privacy  policy" link does not constitute a legally binding obligation on the part of the service.
The linked resource can only be interpreted as a description of the expected practice.
It is recommended that publishers of privacy policy resources linked to using the "privacy policy" link relation provide a clear and simple mechanism for signaling when changes to the privacy policy resource have been made, such as generating a new Entity Tag for the resource or generating a hash over the privacy policy's content.
The extent to which mechanisms are utilized is out of the scope of this specification, however.
The "privacy policy" Link Relation and P3P
The Platform for Privacy Preferences
[P3P] is a W3C Recommendation that defines a data format for the expression of privacy policy information.
While the "privacy policy" link relation can be used to reference P3P documents, there is no intended relationship, normative or otherwise, between this specification and the P3P Recommendation.
As far as this specification is concerned, P3P documents are just one possible type of resource that "privacy policy" links can reference.
"terms of service" The "terms of service" link relation can be used to refer to a resource describing the terms of service associated with the link's context.
The terms of service can be any resource that describes the rules to which a consumer of the service must agree to follow when using the service provided by the link's context.
For example, an HTTP server can include "terms of service" links within all HTTP responses using any combination of Link headers or links embedded in the response payload: HTTP/1.1 200 OK Content Type:
It must be noted that the terms of service linked to using this link relation carry no legal weight and can be ignored with impunity in the absence of an explicit, legally enforceable contract.
The linked terms of service are simply a notice of the terms that may be expected to apply once a contract is established.
"type" The "type" link relation can be used to indicate that the context resource is an instance of the resource identified by the target Internationalized Resource Identifier (IRI).
rel "type" Sally When used within the header of an HTTP message, the type specified by the "type" link relation cannot be confused with the content type of the payload as given by the Content Type header.
The "type" link relation references the payload's abstract semantic type, whereas the Content Type header identifies the specific serialization format of the payload.
If the context can be considered to be an instance of multiple semantic types, multiple "type" link relations can be used.
The "Link Relation Types" registry has been updated with the following entries:  Relation Name: about  Description: Refers to a resource that is the subject of the link's context.
Reference: This specification, Section 2  Relation Name: preview  Description: Refers to a resource that provides a preview of the link's context.
Reference: This specification, Section 3  Relation Name:
: Refers to a privacy policy associated with the link's context.
Reference: This specification, Section 4  Relation Name: terms of service  Description: Refers to the terms of service associated with the link's context.
Reference: This specification, Section 5  Relation Name: type  Description: Refers to a resource identifying the abstract semantic type of which the link's context is considered to be an instance.
Reference: This specification, Section 6 8.
There are no additional security concerns introduced by this document.
