Abstract This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace for naming persistent resources defined by Aerospace and Defence Industries Association of Europe (ASD)
(S1000D) is an international specification for the procurement and production of technical publications.
The current issue of the specification has been jointly produced by the Aerospace and Defence Industries Association of Europe (ASD; previously AECMA, European Association of Aerospace Industries) and the Aerospace Industries Association of America (AIA).
The specification is used worldwide by a variety of commercial and government entities for the development of technical documentation.
The specification adopts ISO, Computer Aided Acquisition and Life  Cycle Support (CALS), and W3C standards to promote document standardization in which information is generated in a neutral format.
Compliant documentation generated using the specification can be processed on different, and often disparate, IT systems.
It is this feature, added to the concept of modularization, that makes the specification acceptable to the wider international community.
Portions of S1000D define a resource coding system allowing resources created under the specification to be uniquely identified in global environment.
To provide for the creation of a web based resource management system, ASD would like to assign URNs [2][3][4] to resources created under the specification in order to retain unique, permanent, location independent names for these resources, in addition to providing a framework for resolution of these resources.
For more information about ASD and S1000D, see http://www.s1000d.org.
This namespace specification is for a formal namespace.
Specification Template Namespace ID: To be assigned.
Registration information: Version 2 Date: <2005 03 7, when submitted
> Declared registrant of the namespace:
Name: ASD TPSMG Chairperson Address:
Corporate Technical Services Technical Documentation Kentigern House 65
Mr. Dennis Hoyland E mail:
The identifier has the following ABNF [5] structure. ;start ABNF notation
"S1000D:" NSS   dmc nss / pmc nss / csn nss / icn nss com nss / ddn nss / dml nss ;Define the subnamespace as an subnamespace identifier ;plus a subnamespace code string dmc nss
"DMC " nss code pmc nss
"PMC " nss code csn nss
"CSN " nss code icn nss
"ICN " nss code com nss   "COM " nss code ddn nss
"DDN " nss code dml nss
"DML " nss code ;Define the subnamespace code as a string encoded to the ;format specified by the namespace identifier and an ;optional extension string indicating the resource status.
subcode subext ;The code strings are a groups of alpha and digit characters ;separated by the dash character.
The specific code syntax ;for each subnamespace is described in ASD Specification 1000D.
The following subnamespaces are currently defined: "DMC" contains all Data Modules Codes "PMC" contains all Publication Module Codes "CSN" contains all Catalogue Sequence Numbers "ICN" contains all Illustration Control Numbers.
COM" contains all Comment Codes. "
DDN" contains all Data Dispatch Notices.
"DML" contains all Data Module Lists.
Example usage: URN:S1000D:{subid} {subcode} {subext} e.g.
DMC AE A 07 05 0000
L EN, the first issue in English.
ASD S1000D, Issue 2.2 Reference: Chap 7.4.1.2
, "IETP Resource resolution" url: http://www.s1000d.org Identifier uniqueness considerations: Identifier uniqueness is guaranteed through processes outlined within ASD S1000D.
All codes defined within the specification must begin with a Model Identifier (MI) that will be registered with the NATO Maintenance and Supply Agency (NAMSA) and is never to be reused.
All project generated codes are prefixed by the assigned MI and are required by the specification to be unique within the scope of the project.
Since all project codes are prefixed by a globally unique MI, and since these codes must be unique within the project, all generated identifiers will be globally unique.
Identifier persistence considerations: Persistence of identifiers is dependent upon suitable delegation of resolution and the fact that generated identifiers are to be persistent once published.
Existing information objects can be used in new projects by referencing them through their persistent identifiers.
Process of identifier assignment: Identifiers are assigned in the following manner.
Projects are assigned a Model Identifier by the NAMSA organization.
Projects then generate identifiers using the processes outlined in ASD S1000D.
The codes are prefixed with the encoding identifier and possibly postfixed by the extension status identifiers.
The project identified by the Model Identifier is responsible for providing a method of resource resolution.
A suggested method of resolution is outlined in ASD S1000D. Rules for Lexical Equivalence: All generated identifiers are to be considered case insensitive.
Conformance with URN syntax: No special considerations.
Validation mechanism: Identifiers must conform to ASD S1000D. Scope: Global. 3.
The following examples are not guaranteed to be real and are provided for illustrative purposes only.
DMC AE A 07 05 0000
There are no additional security considerations other than those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.
Namespace Considerations and Community Considerations Resources will be named and maintained in accordance with the processes described in this document, in addition to the processes described in S1000D.  Any organization or individual can utilize the specification to create resources described by S1000D.  Resolution and/or use of created resources is unrestricted by the specification in order to promote widespread adoption of open ASD standards, although organizations creating resources may control them as they see fit.
This document describes a "S1000D" URN NID registration for the S1000D organization and has been entered into the IANA registry of URN NIDs (http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn namespaces).
