This memo is an official status report on the protocols used in the ARPA Internet community.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
INTRODUCTION This RFC identifies the documents specifying the official protocols used in the Internet.
Comments indicate any revisions or changes planned.
To first order, the official protocols are those in the "Internet Protocol Transition Workbook" (IPTW) dated March 1982.
There are several protocols in use that are not in the IPTW.
A few of the protocols in the IPTW have been revised.
Notably, the mail protocols have been revised and issued as a volume titled "Internet Mail Protocols" dated November 1982.
Telnet and the most useful Telnet options have been revised and issued as a volume titled "Internet Telnet Protocol and Options" (ITP) dated June 1983.
The File Transfer Protocol has been revised most recently as RFC 959 which is not yet included in any collection.
Some protocols have not been revised for many years, these are found in the old "ARPANET Protocol Handbook" (APH) dated January 1978.
There is also a volume of protocol related information called the "Internet Protocol Implementers Guide" (IPIG) dated August 1982.
This document is organized as a sketchy outline.
The entries are protocols (e.g., Transmission Control Protocol).
In each entry there are notes on status, specification, comments, other references, dependencies, and contact.
The STATUS is one of: required, recommended, elective, or experimental.
The SPECIFICATION identifies the protocol defining documents.
The COMMENTS describe any differences from the specification or problems with the protocol.
The OTHER REFERENCES identify documents that comment on or expand on the protocol.
The DEPENDENCIES indicate what other protocols are called upon by this protocol.
The CONTACT indicates a person who can answer questions about the protocol.
In particular, the status may be: required all hosts must implement the required protocol, recommended all hosts are encouraged to implement the recommended protocol, elective hosts may implement or not the elective protocol, experimental hosts should not implement the experimental protocol unless they are participating in the experiment and have coordinated their use of this protocol with the contact person, and none this is not a protocol.
For further information about protocols in general, please contact: Joyce Reynolds USC Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, California  90292
Phone: (213) 822 1511 ARPA mail:
None SPECIFICATION:  IEN 48 (in IPTW)
Gives an overview of the organization and principles of the Internet.
Could be revised and expanded.
Leiner, B., Cole R., Postel, J., and D. Mills, "The DARPA Protocol Suite", IEEE INFOCOM 85, Washington, D.C., March 1985.
Also in IEEE Communications Magazine, and as ISI/RS 85 153, March 1985.
Postel, J., "Internetwork Applications Using the DARPA Protocol Suite", IEEE INFOCOM 85, Washington, D.C., March 1985.
Also in IEEE Communications Magazine, and as ISI/RS 85 151, April 1985.
Padlipsky, M.A., "The Elements of Networking Style and other Essays and Animadversions on the Art of Intercomputer Networking", Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1985.
RFC 871 A Perspective on the ARPANET Reference Model DEPENDENCIES:
Required SPECIFICATION:  RFC 791 (in IPTW)
This is the universal protocol of the Internet.
This datagram protocol provides the universal addressing of hosts in the Internet.
A few minor problems have been noted in this document.
The most serious is a bit of confusion in the route options.
The route options have a pointer that indicates which octet of the route is the next to be used.
The confusion is between the phrases "the pointer is relative to this option" and "the smallest legal value for the pointer is 4".
If you are confused, forget about the relative part, the pointer begins at 4.
Another important point is the alternate reassembly procedure suggested in RFC 815.
Some changes are in the works for the security option.
Note that ICMP is defined to be an integral part of IP.
You have not completed an implementation of IP if it does not include ICMP.
RFC 815 (in IPIG) IP Datagram Reassembly Algorithms RFC 814 (in IPIG) Names, Addresses, Ports, and Routes RFC 816 (in IPIG)
Fault Isolation and Recovery RFC 817 (in IPIG) Modularity and Efficiency in Protocol Implementation MIL STD 1777 Military Standard Internet Protocol RFC 963
Some Problems with the Specification of the Military Standard Internet Protocol Official
ISIB.ARPA Internet Control Message Protocol
Required SPECIFICATION:  RFC 792 (in IPTW)
The control messages and error reports that go with the Internet Protocol.
A few minor errors in the document have been noted.
Suggestions have been made for additional types of redirect message and additional destination unreachable messages.
A proposal for two additional ICMP message types is made in RFC 950 "Internet Subnets", Address Mask Request (A1 17), and Address Mask Reply (A2 18).
The details of these ICMP types are subject to change.
Use of these ICMP types is experimental.
Note that ICMP is defined to be an integral part of IP.
You have not completed an implementation of IP if it does not include ICMP.
ISIB.ARPA Official ARPA Internet Protocols
RFC 961 HOST LEVEL User Datagram Protocol
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 768 (in IPTW)
COMMENTS: Provides a datagram service to applications.
Adds port addressing to the IP services.
The only change noted for the UDP specification is a minor clarification that if in computing the checksum a padding octet is used for the computation it is not transmitted or counted in the length.
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 793 (in IPTW)
COMMENTS: Provides reliable end to end data stream service.
Many comments and corrections have been received for the TCP specification document.
These are primarily document bugs rather than protocol bugs.
There are many minor corrections and clarifications needed in this section.
There are still some phrases in the document that give a "record mark" flavor to the push.
These should be further clarified.
The push is not a record mark.
Urgent:  Page 17 is wrong.
The urgent pointer points to the last octet of urgent data (not to the first octet of non urgent data).
Several comments have been received on difficulties with contacting listening servers.
There should be some discussion of implementation issues for servers, and some notes on alternative models of system and process organization for servers.
The maximum segment size option should be generalized and clarified.
It can be used to either increase or decrease the maximum segment size from the default.
The TCP Maximum Segment Size is the IP Maximum Datagram Size minus forty.
The default IP Maximum Datagram Size is 576.
The default TCP Maximum Segment Size is 536.
For further discussion, see RFC 879.
There have been questions about automatically closing idle connections.
Idle connections are ok, and should not be closed.
There are several cases where idle connections arise, for example, in Telnet when a user is thinking for a long time following a message from the server computer before his next input.
There is no TCP "probe" mechanism, and none is needed.
Queued Receive Data on Closing
:  There are several points where it is not clear from the description what to do about data received by the TCP but not yet passed to the user, particularly when the connection is being closed.
In general, the data is to be kept to give to the user if he does a RECV call.
The description says that segments that arrive out of order, that is, are not exactly the next segment to be processed, may be kept on hand.
It should also point out that there is a very large performance penalty for not doing so.
This is the time out started on an open or send call.
If this user time out occurs the user should be notified, but the connection should not be closed or the TCB deleted.
The user should explicitly ABORT the connection if he wants to give up.
RFC 813 (in IPIG) Window and Acknowledgement Strategy in TCP RFC 814 (in IPIG) Names, Addresses, Ports, and Routes RFC 816 (in IPIG)
Modularity and Efficiency in Protocol Implementation RFC 879 TCP Maximum Segment Size RFC 889 Internet Delay Experiments RFC 896
TCP/IP Congestion Control MIL STD 1778 Military Standard Transmission Control Protocol RFC 964
Some Problems with the Specification of the Military Standard Transmission Control Protocol DEPENDENCIES:
This is a good tool for debugging protocol implementations in remotely located computers.
This protocol is used to monitor Internet gateways and the TACs.
Hinden@BBN UNIX.ARPA Official ARPA Internet Protocols
A debugging protocol, allows debugger like access to remote systems.
This specification should be updated and reissued as an RFC.
Postel@USC ISIB.ARPA "Stub" Exterior Gateway Protocol
Recommended for Gateways SPECIFICATION:  RFC 888,
The protocol used between gateways of different administrations to exchange routing information.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
RFC 827, RFC 890 DEPENDENCIES:
The gateway protocol now used in the core gateways.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  IEN 90 COMMENTS:
Defines a capability to combine several segments from different higher level protocols in one IP datagram.
No current experiment in progress.
There is some question as to the extent to which the sharing this protocol envisions can actually take place.
Also, there are some issues about the information captured in the multiplexing header being (a) insufficient, or (b) over specific.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
A gateway resource allocation protocol designed for use in multihost real time applications.
The implementation of this protocol has evolved and may no longer be consistent with this specification.
The document should be updated and issued as an RFC.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
ISI Internal Memo COMMENTS: Defines the procedures for real time voice conferencing.
The specification is an ISI Internal Memo which should be updated and issued as an RFC.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
RFC 741 DEPENDENCIES:  Internet Protocol,
RFC 961 Reliable Data Protocol
This protocol is designed to efficiently support the bulk transfer of data for such host monitoring and control applications as loading/dumping and remote debugging.
The protocol is intended to be simple to implement but still be efficient in environments where there may be long transmission delays and loss or non sequential delivery of message segments.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
This protocol is a transport level host to host protocol designed for an internet environment.
While the issues discussed may not be directly relevant to the research problems of the DARPA community, they may be interesting to a number of researchers and implementors.
DEPENDENCIES:  Internet Protocol CONTACT:  Trudy@ACC.ARPA
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 854 (in "Internet Telnet Protocol and Options")
The protocol for remote terminal access.
This has been revised since the IPTW.
RFC 764 in IPTW is now obsolete.
General description of options:  RFC 855 (in "Internet Telnet Protocol and Options")
The ITP column indicates if the specification is included in the Internet Telnet Protocol and Options.
The APH column indicates if the specification is included in the ARPANET Protocol Handbook.
The USE column of the table above indicates which options are in general use.
The Binary Transmission, Echo, Suppress Go Ahead, Status, Timing Mark, and Extended Options List options have been recently updated and reissued.
These are the most frequently implemented options.
The remaining options should be reviewed and the useful ones should be revised and reissued.
The others should be eliminated.
The following are recommended:  Binary Transmission, Echo,
Suppress Go Ahead, Status, Timing Mark, and Extended Options List.
The protocol for moving files between Internet hosts.
Provides for access control and negotiation of file parameters.
The following new optional commands are included in this edition of the specification:  Change to Parent Directory (CDUP), Structure Mount (SMNT), Store Unique (STOU), Remove Directory (RMD), Make Directory (MKD), Print Directory (PWD), and System (SYST).
Note that this specification is compatible with the previous edition (RFC 765).
RFC 678 Document File Format Standards MIL STD 1780 File Transfer Protocol DEPENDENCIES:
ISIB.ARPA Official ARPA Internet Protocols
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 783 (in IPTW)
A very simple file moving protocol, no access control is provided.
This is in use in several local networks.
Ambiguities in the interpretation of several of the transfer modes should be  clarified, and additional transfer modes could be defined.
Additional error codes could be defined to more clearly identify problems.
ISIB.ARPA Simple File Transfer Protocol
SFTP is a simple file transfer protocol.
It fills the need of people wanting a protocol that is more useful than TFTP but easier to implement (and less powerful) than FTP.
SFTP supports user access control, file transfers, directory listing, directory changing, file renaming and deleting.
SFTP can be implemented with any reliable 8 bit byte stream oriented protocol, this document describes its TCP specification.
SFTP uses only one TCP connection; whereas TFTP implements a connection over UDP, and FTP uses two TCP connections (one using the TELNET protocol).
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 821 (in "Internet Mail Protocols")
The procedure for transmitting computer mail between hosts.
This has been revised since the IPTW, it is in the "Internet Mail Protocols" volume of November 1982.
RFC 788 (in IPTW) is obsolete.
There have been many misunderstandings and errors in the early implementations.
Some documentation of these problems can be found in the file [ISIB]<SMTP>MAIL.ERRORS.
Some minor differences between RFC 821 and RFC 822 should be resolved.
RFC 822 Mail Header Format Standards
This has been revised since the IPTW, it is in the "Internet Mail Protocols" volume of November 1982.
RFC 733 (in IPTW) is obsolete.
Further revision of RFC 822 is needed to correct some minor errors in the details of the specification.
MIL STD 1781 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
A resource location protocol for use in the ARPA Internet.
This protocol utilizes the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) which in turn calls on the Internet Protocol to deliver its datagrams.
RFC 909 COMMENTS: Specifies a protocol for loading, dumping and debugging target machines from hosts in a network environment.
It is also designed to accommodate a variety of target CPU types.
It provides a powerful set of debugging services, while at the same time, it is structured so that a simple subset may be implemented in applications like boot loading where efficiency and space are at a premium.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES:  Reliable Data Protocol CONTACT:
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 407 (in APH)
The general protocol for submitting batch jobs and retrieving the results.
Some changes needed for use with TCP.
File Transfer Protocol Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
A special protocol for submitting batch jobs and retrieving the results used with the UCLA IBM OS system.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
RFC 818 COMMENTS: Provides special access to user Telnet on a remote system.
DEPENDENCIES: Telnet, Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
The protocol for vector graphics.
Very minor changes needed for use with TCP.
DEPENDENCIES: Telnet, Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
ISIB.ARPA Official ARPA Internet Protocols
Debugging protocol, sends back whatever you send it.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Debugging protocol, throws away whatever you send it.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Debugging protocol, sends you ASCII data.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol Official ARPA Internet Protocols
Debugging protocol, sends you a short ASCII message.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Postel@USC ISIB.ARPA Active Users Protocol
Lists the currently active users.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 742 (in APH)
COMMENTS: Provides information on the current or most recent activity of a user.
Some extensions have been suggested.
Some changes are are needed for TCP.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Accesses the ARPANET Directory database.
Provides a way to find out about people, their addresses, phone numbers, organizations, and mailboxes.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 881, 882,
RFC 920 Domain Requirements RFC 921 Domain Name Implementation Schedule
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Mockapetris@USC ISIB.ARPA Official ARPA Internet Protocols
Accesses the Registered Internet Hosts database (HOSTS.TXT).
Provides a way to find out about a host in the Internet, its Internet Address, and the protocols it implements.
RFC 952 Host Table Specification DEPENDENCIES:
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  IEN 116 (in IPTW)
COMMENTS: Provides machine oriented procedure for translating a host name to an Internet Address.
This specification has significant problems:  1)
The name syntax is out of date.
The protocol details are ambiguous, in particular, the length octet either does or doesn't include itself and the op code.
The extensions are not supported by any known implementation.
This protocol is now abandoned in favor of the DOMAIN protocol.
Further implementations of this protocol are not advised.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
ISIB.ARPA Official ARPA Internet Protocols
RFC 961 CSNET Mailbox Name Server Protocol
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  CS DN 2 COMMENTS:
Provides access to the CSNET data base of users to give information about users names, affiliations, and mailboxes.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT: Solomon@UWISC.ARPA
RFC 867 COMMENTS: Provides the day and time in ASCII character string.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
A proposed protocol for synchronizing a set of network clocks using a set of distributed clients and servers.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
OTHER REFERENCES:  RFC 778, RFC 891, RFC 956, and RFC 957.
RFC 868 COMMENTS: Provides the time as the number of seconds from a specified reference time.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
RFC 778 COMMENTS: Provides a mechanism for keeping synchronized clocks.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 734 (
A special Telnet like protocol for display terminals.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Crispin@SU SCORE.ARPA Internet Message Protocol
This is an experimental multimedia mail transfer protocol.
The implementation is called a Message Processing Module or MPM.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
RFC 767 Structured Document Formats DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
The intent of the Post Office Protocol Version 2 (POP2) is to allow a user's workstation to access mail from a mailbox server.
It is expected that mail will be posted from the workstation to the mailbox server via the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP).
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 569 COMMENTS:
Describes a simple line editor which could be provided by every Internet host.
This server provides a means to determine the identity of a user of a particular TCP connection.
Given a TCP port number pair, it returns a character string which identifies the owner of that connection on the server's system.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
OTHER REFERENCES:  Supercedes RFC 912 DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
RFC 951 COMMENTS: This proposed protocol provides an IP/UDP bootstrap protocol which allows a diskless client machine to discover its own IP address, the address of a server host, and the name of a file to be loaded into memory and executed.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Internet Protocol, User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
RFC 960 COMMENTS: Describes the fields of various protocols that are assigned specific values for actual use, and lists the currently assigned values.
Issued November 1985, replaces RFC 943, RFC 790 in IPTW, and RFC 923.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 794 (in IPTW)
Describes how to do pre emption of TCP connections.
None SPECIFICATION:  RFC 795 (in IPTW)
Describes the mapping of the IP type of service field onto the parameters of some specific networks.
Out of date, needs revision.
None SPECIFICATION:  RFC 796 (in IPTW)
Describes the mapping between Internet Addresses and the addresses of some specific networks.
Out of date, needs revision.
Describes standard format rules for several types of documents.
RFC 797 COMMENTS: Describes a standard format for bitmap data.
COMMENTS: Describes a standard format for facsimile data.
ISIB.ARPA Host Front End Protocol
RFC 929 COMMENTS: Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
RFC 877 COMMENTS: Describes a standard for the transmission of IP Datagrams over Public Data Networks.
RFC 778 DCNET Internet Clock Service CONTACT:  Mills@USC
RFC 895 COMMENTS: OTHER REFERENCES:
CONTACT:  Postel@USC ISIB.ARPA Internet Protocol on IEEE 802.3
A proposed protocol of two methods of encapsulating Internet Protocol (IP) datagrams on an IEEE 802.3 network.
Specifies procedures for the use of subnets, including the ultility of "subnets" of Internet networks, which are logically visible sub sections of a single Internet.
Recommended in the sense of "if you do subnetting at all do it this way".
OTHER REFERENCES:  RFC 940, RFC 917, RFC 925, RFC 932, RFC 936,
RFC 922 DEPENDENCIES: CONTACT:  Mogul@SU SCORE.ARPA Official ARPA Internet Protocols
RFC 961 Broadcasting Internet Datagrams
A proposed protocol of simple rules for broadcasting Internet datagrams on local networks that support broadcast, for addressing broadcasts, and for how gateways should handle them.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
RFC 922 DEPENDENCIES: CONTACT: Mogul@SU SCORE.ARPA Address Resolution Protocol
This is a procedure for finding the network hardware address corresponding to an Internet Address.
Postel@USC ISIB.ARPA A Reverse Address Resolution Protocol
This is a procedure for workstations to dynamically find their protocol address (e.g., their Internet Address), when they only only know their hardware address (e.g., their attached physical network address).
RFC 961 OTHER REFERENCES: CONTACT:  Mogul@SU SCORE.ARPA Multi LAN Address Resolution Protocol
Discussion of the various problems and potential solutions of "transparent subnets" in a multi LAN environment.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
ISIB.ARPA Broadcasting Internet Datagrams with Subnets
A proposed protocol of simple rules for broadcasting Internet datagrams on local networks that support broadcast, for addressing broadcasts, and for how gateways should handle them.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: CONTACT: Mogul@SU SCORE.ARPA Official ARPA Internet Protocols
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 907 COMMENTS:
This protocol specifies the network access level communication between an arbitrary computer, called a host, and a packet switched satellite network, e.g., SATNET or WBNET.
Note:  Implementations of HAP should be performed in coordination with satellite network development and operations personnel.
UNIX.ARPA Reliable Asynchronous Transfer Protocol
This paper specifies a protocol which allows two programs to reliably communicate over a communication link.
It ensures that the data entering one end of the link if received arrives at the other end intact and unaltered.
This proposed protocol is designed to operate over a full duplex point to point connection.
It contains some features which tailor it to the RS 232 links now in current use.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
This paper discusses a Thinwire Protocol for connecting personal computers to the ARPA Internet.
It primarily focuses on the particular problems in the ARPA Internet of low speed network interconnection with personal computers, and possible methods of solution.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
