Abstract Advertising Digital Identifiers (Ad IDs) are used to identify advertising assets across all media platforms.
This document defines the formal Uniform Resource Name (URN)
Namespace Identifier (NID) "adid" for Ad IDs.
This document defines the formal Uniform Resource Name (URN)
Namespace Identifier (NID) for Ad IDs.
Ad ID is the industry standard for identifying advertising assets across all media platforms (e.g., over the air, online, over the top, mobile, and place based).
Ad IDs are unique codes for each creative advertising asset.
Those unique codes are applied to all media.
Ad IDs are an eleven character ASCII string except for High Definition (HD) or Three Dimensional (3D) codes, which have an H or D as the 12th character.
Ad ID also provides descriptive metadata about the advertisement.
The metadata includes the advertiser, brand, product, commercial title, product categorization, and other essential data about the advertisement.
The metadata can be retrieved using the unique code.
See Appendix A for additional background information.
URN Namespace Definition Template Using the template in [RFC3406], the namespace definition is as follows:
Namespace ID: adid Registration Information:
22 Declared registrant of the namespace:
Advertising Digital Identification, LLC 11020 David Taylor Drive, Suite 305 Charlotte, NC 28262 1103
Declaration of syntactic structure: The identifier structure is an Ad ID that consists of a unique eleven character string or a unique twelve character string (video codes only).
This string is divided into three parts: 1.
A four character alphanumeric Company Prefix, not starting with "0" 2.
A seven character alphanumeric code 3.
An optional one character Video Format Identifier.
The URN representation URN ADID of an Ad ID conforms to the following syntax (expressed using ABNF [RFC5234]):
"urn:adid:" full adid identifier full adid identifier
full adid prefix full adid code
[full adid suffix] full adid prefix
3 alphanum full adid code
alphanum full adid suffix   "H" /
"D" alphanum   ALPHA / DIGIT Examples:
[SMPTERP2092 1] specifies Advertising Digital Identifier (Ad ID) representations.
Identifier uniqueness considerations: The Registrar (Advertising Digital Identification, LLC) is responsible for managing the assignment of the Ad ID and shall ensure its uniqueness by checking the identifier against the list of existing identifiers.
In addition, each Ad ID is associated with a its own unique URN ADID.
Ad ID Registrar has assigned "adid" as a unique identifier.
It is associated with a single URN ADID.
Identifier persistence considerations: The assignment process guarantees that 'adids' will not be reassigned or reused, and the binding between the identifier and its resource is permanent.
These rules apply to this URN namespace.
Process of identifier assignment: Ad IDs are generated by the Ad ID's proprietary registration procedures.
Process for identifier resolution: Ad ID URNs are resolved via URN resolvers that are maintained by the Ad ID.
Rules for Lexical Equivalence: Lexical equivalence of URN ADID is defined by case insensitive string match.
Conformance with URN Syntax: As specified above, the syntax of URN ADID is a subset of the URN syntax specified in [RFC2141].
The validity of a URN ADID can be checked using Ad ID's web services.
For more information on Ad ID's web services, please refer to the following links: http://www.ad id.org/user support/faqs/faq category/web services http://www.ad id.org/ad
Ad IDs are centrally registered, globally unique identifiers of advertising assets that are used worldwide.
Namespace Considerations Ad IDs are intended for use in Internet applications, where URNs are routinely used to identify audiovisual resources.
There is no direct mapping from Ad IDs to existing URN namespaces.
The primary registrants of Ad IDs are advertisers and agencies.
Ad  IDs can be used by anyone to unambiguously identify advertising assets and retrieve underlying metadata.
The primary benefits of its use are providing greater transparency and accountability in the advertising marketplace, helping to eliminate costly errors associated with the inconsistent use of advertising asset identifiers throughout the advertising supply chain, and enabling a more granular audience measurement across multiple platforms.
This document specifies the syntax of the Ad ID URN namespace and makes no security representations.
However, note that failure to conform to the syntactic and lexical equivalence rules specified in [RFC3406] when using an Ad ID as a criterion for accessing restricted resources can result in granting unauthorized access.
This document defines "ad id" in the "Formal URN Namespaces" registry.
Additional Background Information Ad IDs are an eleven character ASCII string except for High Definition (HD) or Three Dimensional (3D) codes, which have an H or D as the 12th character.
Ad ID may have Complimentary Definition Codes (CDCs), which are matching SD, HD, and/or 3D codes where only the 12th character of the code varies.
This only applies to video codes.
For example, a video with a standard format and high definition format would have a single code for each format.
Advertising Digital Identification <http://www.ad id.org/>
