Abstract The Point to Point Protocol (PPP) [1] provides a standard method for transporting multi protocol datagrams over point to point links.
This document describes the use of PPP over Synchronous Optical Network (SONET) and Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) circuits.
This document replaces and obsoletes RFC 1619.
See section 7 for a summary of the changes from RFC 1619.
Introduction PPP was designed as a standard method of communicating over point to point links.
Initial deployment has been over short local lines, leased lines, and plain old telephone service (POTS) using modems.
As new packet services and higher speed lines are introduced, PPP is easily deployed in these environments as well.
This specification is primarily concerned with the use of the PPP encapsulation over SONET/SDH links.
Since SONET/SDH is by definition a point to point circuit, PPP is well suited to use over these links.
Real differences between SONET and SDH (other than terminology) are minor; for the purposes of encapsulation of PPP over SONET/SDH, they are inconsequential or irrelevant.
The only currently supported SONET/SDH SPE/VCs are the following:
The keywords MUST, MUST NOT, MAY, OPTIONAL, REQUIRED, RECOMMENDED, SHALL, SHALL NOT, SHOULD, and SHOULD NOT are to be interpreted as defined in [6].
Physical Layer Requirements PPP treats SONET/SDH transport as octet oriented synchronous links.
SONET/SDH links are full duplex by definition.
Interface Format PPP in HDLC like framing presents an octet interface to the physical layer.
There is no provision for sub octets to be supplied or accepted [3][5].
The octet stream is mapped into the SONET STS SPE/SDH Higher Order VC, with the octet boundaries aligned with the SONET STS SPE/SDH Higher Order VC octet boundaries.
Scrambling is performed during insertion into the SONET STS  SPE/SDH Higher Order VC to provide adequate transparency and protect against potential security threats (see Section 6).
For backwards compatibility with RFC 1619
(STS 3c SPE/VC 4 only), the scrambler MAY have an on/off capability where the scrambler is bypassed entirely when it is in the off mode.
If this capability is provided, the default MUST be set to scrambling enabled.
For PPP over SONET/SDH, the entire SONET/SDH payload (SONET STS  SPE/SDH Higher Order VC minus the path overhead and any fixed stuff) is scrambled using a self synchronous scrambler of polynomial X  43   1.
See Section 4 for the description of the scrambler.
The proper order of operation is: When transmitting: IP   PPP
Scrambling    SONET/SDH framing When receiving:
The Path Signal Label (C2) indicates the contents of the SONET STS  SPE/SDH Higher Order VC.
The value of 22 (16 hex) is used to indicate PPP with X^43   1 scrambling [4].
For compatibility with RFC 1619 (STS 3c SPE/VC 4 only), if scrambling has been configured to be off, then the value 207 (CF hex) is used for the Path Signal Label to indicate PPP without scrambling.
The Multiframe Indicator (H4) is unused, and MUST be zero.
Control Signals PPP does not require the use of control signals.
When available, using such signals can allow greater functionality and performance.
Implications are discussed in [2].
The framing for octet synchronous links is described in "PPP in HDLC like Framing" [2].
The PPP frames are located by row within the SONET STS SPE/SDH Higher Order VC payload.
Because frames are variable in length, the frames are allowed to cross SONET STS SPE/SDH Higher Order VC boundaries.
X  43   1 Scrambler Description
The X  43   1 scrambler transmitter and receiver operation are as follows:
C   D (that is, the FCS calculator is fed as follows:
That is, the scrambler is fed as follows:
The scrambler operates continuously through the bytes of the SONET STS SPE/SDH Higher Order VC, bypassing bytes of SONET Path Overhead and any fixed stuff (see Figure 20 of ANSI T1.105 [3] or Figure 10 17 of ITU G.707 [5]).
The scrambling state at the beginning of a SONET STS SPE/SDH Higher Order VC is the state at the end of the previous SONET STS SPE/SDH Higher Order VC.
Thus, the scrambler runs continuously and is not reset per frame.
The initial seed is randomly chosen by transmitter to improve operational security (see Section 6).
Consequently, the first 43 transmitted bits following startup or reframe operation will not be descrambled correctly.
Configuration Details Other than the FCS length
(see below), the standard LCP sync configuration defaults apply to SONET/SDH links.
The following Configuration Options are RECOMMENDED for STS 3c  SPE/VC 4:
No Address and Control Field Compression
No Protocol Field Compression For operation at STS 12c SPE/VC 4 4c and above, Address and Control Field Compression and Protocol Field Compression are NOT RECOMMENDED.
The Magic Number option remains RECOMMENDED.
Regarding the FCS length, with one exception, the 32 bit FCS MUST be used for all SONET/SDH rates.
For STS 3c SPE/VC 4 only, the 16 bit FCS MAY be used, although the 32 bit FCS is RECOMMENDED.
The FCS length is set by provisioning and is not negotiated.
The major change from RFC 1619 is the addition of payload scrambling when inserting the HDLC like framed PPP packets into the SONET STS  SPE/SDH Higher Order VC.
RFC 1619 was operationally found to permit malicious users to generate packets with bit patterns that could create SONET/SDH layer low transition density synchronization problems, emulation of the SDH set reset scrambler pattern, and replication of the STM N frame alignment word.
The use of the x^43
1 self synchronous scrambler was introduced to alleviate these potential security problems.
Predicting the output of the scrambler requires knowledge of the 43 bit state of the transmitter as the scrambling of a known input is begun.
This requires knowledge of both the initial 43 bit state of the scrambler when it started and every byte of data scrambled by the device since it was started.
The odds of guessing correctly are 1/2  43, with the additional probability of 1/127 that a correct guess will leave the frame properly aligned in the SONET/SDH payload, which results in a probability of 9e 16 against being able to deliberately cause SONET/SDH layer problems.
This seems reasonably secure for this application.
This scrambler is also used when transmitting ATM over SONET/SDH, and public network carriers have considerable experience with its use.
A known security issue is bandwidth reduction by intentional transmission of characters or sequences requiring transparency processing by including flag and/or escape characters in user data.
A user may cause up to a 100% increase in the bandwidth required for transmitting his or her packets by filling the packet with flag and/or escape characters.
As mentioned in the previous section, the major change from RFC 1619 was the addition of payload scrambling when inserting the HDLC like framed PPP packets into the SONET STS SPE/SDH Higher Order VC.
Other changes were: The terminology was updated to better match that used by ANSI and ITU T.
The Path Signal Label (C2) is set to 22 (16 hex) when using X^43   1 scrambling.
The 32 bit FCS is required except for operation with STS 3c SPE/VC 4, in which case the 16 bit FCS is allowed (but the 32 bit FCS is still recommended).
The Security Considerations section was added.
