USER/SERVER SITE PROTOCOL NETWORK HOST QUESTIONNAIRE
The answer to a number of questions about the characteristics and operation of Network HOSTS will be useful to implementers of some early versions of TELNET, and/or to the USER/SERVER SITE PROTOCOL Committee in their consideration of a full TELNET PROTOCOL specification.
Questions of current interest are covered on the attached questionnaire.
The Technical Liaison contact at each HOST site is asked to review these questions and fill in the answers as soon as convenient after receipt.
One of the members of the committee listed below will contact each HOST site by telephone in the next few days to record the answers.
Does system operate on keyboard terminal input on one character at a time (e.g. searching for a special character other than end of line), or does it accumulate a line at a time and operate on the line when a special character is entered, e.g. Carriage Return (CR)?
What maximum buffer size does your system provide for input of a physical line from a keyboard terminal, and for output to a terminal, printer, or screen?
Input Char Output Char Remarks:
If there is insufficient space on the questionnaire, continue answers on back of page.
Fill out separate questionnaire for each HOST to be directly interfaced to an IMP.
Describe the effect in your system of use of the following keying conventions.
Indicate how implemented, i.e. is there a hardware interrupt?
What is sent into system as data, what is echoed, etc.
If the key(s) are not available, so indicate (as may be the case for Newline for some systems, line feed for 2741's, etc.).
If available but has no meaning, so indicate.
If appropriate, enter data for other terminal types on the back of this page.
What special character or characters are used in your system to awaken some process during the entry of data from a terminal (e.g. control C for some systems, break on others, etc.)?
List the types of keyboard terminals and codes supported by your system.
What internal code(s) is used in your system to represent character sets?
If not ASCII nor EBCDIC, attach a copy of the code.
For each terminal type do you support it in: Half Duplex (Pure)   Half Duplex (with Break or Attention)
Half Duplex (Break & Reverse Break)
Full Duplex (without echo)   Full Duplex (with echo)   8.)
For optional echo systems, at initial connect time is the terminal assumed to require an echo?
Does your system perform error detection (e.g. parity check) on terminal input and, if so, is this a hardware or software check?
Does your system support punched paper tape input?
If so, what sort of end of line sequence is used?
[ This RFC was put into machine readable form for entry ]
[ into the online RFC archives by S.M.H. 5/97 ]
