Extensions to the Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) to Compute Service Aware Label Switched Paths (LSPs)
In certain networks, such as, but not limited to, financial information networks (e.g., stock market data providers), network performance criteria (e.g., latency) are becoming as critical to data path selection as other metrics and constraints.
These metrics are associated with the Service Level Agreement (SLA) between customers and service providers.
The link bandwidth utilization (the total bandwidth of a link in actual use for the forwarding) is another important factor to consider during path computation.
Metric Extensions describe mechanisms with which network performance information is distributed via OSPF and IS IS, respectively.
The Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) provides mechanisms for Path Computation Elements (PCEs) to perform path computations in response to Path Computation Client (PCC) requests.
This document describes the extension to PCEP to carry latency, delay variation, packet loss, and link bandwidth utilization as constraints for end to end path computation.
Introduction Real time network performance information is becoming critical in the path computation in some networks.
Mechanisms to measure latency, delay variation, and packet loss in an MPLS network are described in [RFC6374].
It is important that latency, delay variation, and packet loss are considered during the path selection process, even before the Label Switched Path (LSP) is set up.
Link bandwidth utilization based on real time traffic along the path is also becoming critical during path computation in some networks.
Thus, it is important that the link bandwidth utilization is factored in during the path computation.
The Traffic Engineering Database (TED) is populated with network performance information like link latency, delay variation, packet loss, as well as parameters related to bandwidth (residual bandwidth, available bandwidth, and utilized bandwidth) via TE Metric Extensions in OSPF [RFC7471] or IS IS [RFC7810] or via a management system.
[RFC7823] describes how a Path Computation Element (PCE) [RFC4655] can use that information for path selection for explicitly routed LSPs.
A Path Computation Client (PCC) can request a PCE to provide a path meeting end to end network performance criteria.
This document extends the Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP)
[RFC5440] to handle network performance constraints that include any combination of latency, delay variation, packet loss, and bandwidth utilization constraints.
[RFC7471] and [RFC7810] describe various considerations regarding:  Announcement thresholds and filters  Announcement suppression  Announcement periodicity and network stability
The first two provide configurable mechanisms to bound the number of re advertisements in IGP.
The third provides a way to throttle announcements.
Section 1.2 of [RFC7823] also describes the oscillation and stability considerations while advertising and considering service aware information.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
The following terminology is used in this document.
Link Reserved Bandwidth Utilization (see Section 3.2.2)
This section defines PCEP extensions (see [RFC5440]) for requirements outlined in Appendix A.
The proposed solution is used to support network performance and service aware path computation.
The METRIC object is defined in Section 7.8 of [RFC5440], comprising metric value and metric type (T field), and a flags field, comprising a number of bit flags (B bit and P bit).
This document defines the following types for the METRIC object.
Path Delay metric (Section 3.1.1)
Path Delay Variation metric (Section 3.1.2)
Path Loss metric (Section 3.1.3)
Path Delay metric (Section 3.1.6.1)
T 16: P2MP Path Delay Variation metric (Section 3.1.6.2)
P2MP Path Loss metric (Section 3.1.6.3)
The following terminology is used and expanded along the way.
A network comprises of a set of N links {Li, (i 1...N)}.
A path P of a point to point (P2P) LSP is a list of K links {Lpi,(i 1...K)}.
The Link Delay metric is defined in [RFC7471] and [RFC7810] as "Unidirectional Link Delay".
The Path Delay metric type of the METRIC object in PCEP represents the sum of the Link Delay metric of all links along a P2P path.
Specifically, extending on the above  mentioned terminology:  A Link Delay metric of link
A Path Delay metric for the P2P path P   Sum {D(Lpi),
This is as per the sum of means composition function (Section 4.2.5 of [RFC6049]).
Section 1.2 of [RFC7823] describes oscillation and stability considerations, and Section 2.1 of [RFC7823] describes the calculation of the end to end Path Delay metric.
Further, Section 4.2.9 of [RFC6049] states when this composition function may fail.
A PCC MAY use the Path Delay metric in a Path Computation Request (PCReq) message to request a path meeting the end to end latency requirement.
In this case, the B bit MUST be set to suggest a bound (a maximum) for the Path Delay metric that must not be exceeded for the PCC to consider the computed path as acceptable.
The Path Delay metric must be less than or equal to the value specified in the metric value field.
A PCC can also use this metric to ask PCE to optimize the path delay during path computation.
In this case, the B bit MUST be cleared.
A PCE MAY use the Path Delay metric in a Path Computation Reply (PCRep) message along with a NO PATH object in the case where the PCE cannot compute a path meeting this constraint.
A PCE can also use this metric to send the computed Path Delay metric to the PCC.
Path Delay Metric Value [RFC7471] and [RFC7810] define "Unidirectional Link Delay Sub TLV" to advertise the link delay in microseconds in a 24 bit field.
[RFC5440] defines the METRIC object with a 32 bit metric value encoded in IEEE floating point format (see [IEEE.754]).
Consequently, the encoding for the Path Delay metric value is quantified in units of microseconds and encoded in IEEE floating point format.
The conversion from 24 bit integer to 32 bit IEEE floating point could introduce some loss of precision.
The Link Delay Variation metric is defined in [RFC7471] and [RFC7810] as "Unidirectional Delay Variation".
The Path Delay Variation metric type of the METRIC object in PCEP encodes the sum of the Link Delay Variation metric of all links along the path.
Specifically, extending on the above mentioned terminology:  A delay variation of link L is denoted DV(L)
(average delay variation for link L).
A Path Delay Variation metric for the P2P path P   Sum {DV(Lpi),
Section 1.2 of [RFC7823] describes oscillation and stability considerations, and Section 2.1 of [RFC7823] describes the calculation of the end to end Path Delay Variation metric.
Further, Section 4.2.9 of [RFC6049] states when this composition function may fail.
Note that the IGP advertisement for link attributes includes the average delay variation over a period of time.
An implementation, therefore, MAY use the sum of the average delay variation of links along a path to derive the delay variation of the path.
An end to end bound on delay variation is typically used as constraint in the path computation.
An implementation MAY also use some enhanced composition function for computing the delay variation of a path with better accuracy.
A PCC MAY use the Path Delay Variation metric in a PCReq message to request a path meeting the path delay variation requirement.
In this case, the B bit MUST be set to suggest a bound (a maximum) for the Path Delay Variation metric that must not be exceeded for the PCC to consider the computed path as acceptable.
The path delay variation must be less than or equal to the value specified in the metric value field.
A PCC can also use this metric to ask the PCE to optimize the path delay variation during path computation.
In this case, the B flag MUST be cleared.
A PCE MAY use the Path Delay Variation metric in a PCRep message along with a NO PATH object in the case where the PCE cannot compute a path meeting this constraint.
A PCE can also use this metric to send the computed end to end Path Delay Variation metric to the PCC.
Path Delay Variation Metric Value [RFC7471] and [RFC7810] define "Unidirectional Delay Variation Sub TLV" to advertise the link delay variation in microseconds in a 24 bit field.
[RFC5440] defines the METRIC object with a 32 bit metric value encoded in IEEE floating point format (see [IEEE.754]).
Consequently, the encoding for the Path Delay Variation metric value is quantified in units of microseconds and encoded in IEEE floating point format.
The conversion from 24 bit integer to 32 bit IEEE floating point could introduce some loss of precision.
Path Loss Metric [RFC7471] and [RFC7810] define "Unidirectional Link Loss".
The Path Loss (as a packet percentage)
metric type of the METRIC object in PCEP encodes a function of the unidirectional loss metrics of all links along a P2P path.
The end to end packet loss for the path is represented by this metric.
Specifically, extending on the above mentioned terminology:  The percentage link loss of link L is denoted PL(L).
The fractional link loss of link
The percentage Path Loss metric for the P2P path P
LpK. This is as per the composition function described in Section 5.1.5 of [RFC6049].
A PCC MAY use the Path Loss metric in a PCReq message to request a path meeting the end to end packet loss requirement.
In this case, the B bit MUST be set to suggest a bound (a maximum) for the Path Loss metric that must not be exceeded for the PCC to consider the computed path as acceptable.
The Path Loss metric must be less than or equal to the value specified in the metric value field.
A PCC can also use this metric to ask the PCE to optimize the path loss during path computation.
In this case, the B flag MUST be cleared.
A PCE MAY use the Path Loss metric in a PCRep message along with a NO PATH object in the case where the PCE cannot compute a path meeting this constraint.
A PCE can also use this metric to send the computed end to end Path Loss metric to the PCC.
Path Loss Metric Value [RFC7471] and [RFC7810] define "Unidirectional Link Loss Sub TLV" to advertise the link loss in percentage in a 24 bit field.
[RFC5440] defines the METRIC object with a 32 bit metric value encoded in IEEE floating point format (see [IEEE.754]).
Consequently, the encoding for the Path Loss metric value is quantified as a percentage and encoded in IEEE floating point format.
Non Support of Service Aware Path Computation
If a PCE receives a PCReq message containing a METRIC object with a type defined in this document, and the PCE does not understand or support that metric type, and the P bit is clear in the METRIC object header, then the PCE SHOULD simply ignore the METRIC object as per the processing specified in [RFC5440].
If the PCE does not understand the new METRIC type, and the P bit is set in the METRIC object header, then the PCE MUST send a PCEP Error (PCErr) message containing a PCEP ERROR Object with Error Type   4 (Not supported object) and Error value   4 (Unsupported parameter)
If the PCE understands but does not support the new METRIC type, and the P bit is set in the METRIC object header, then the PCE MUST send a PCErr message containing a PCEP ERROR Object with Error Type   4 (Not supported object) with Error value
5 (Unsupported network performance constraint).
The path computation request MUST then be canceled.
If the PCE understands the new METRIC type, but the local policy has been configured on the PCE to not allow network performance constraint, and the P bit is set in the METRIC object header, then the PCE MUST send a PCErr message containing a PCEP ERROR Object with Error Type   5
(Policy violation) with Error value
(Not allowed network performance constraint).
The path computation request MUST then be canceled.
As explained in [RFC5440], the METRIC object is optional and can be used for several purposes.
In a PCReq message, a PCC MAY insert one or more METRIC objects:  To indicate the metric that MUST be optimized by the path computation algorithm (path delay, path delay variation, or path loss).
To indicate a bound on the METRIC (path delay, path delay variation, or path loss)
that MUST NOT be exceeded for the path to be considered as acceptable by the PCC.
In a PCRep message, the PCE MAY insert the METRIC object with an Explicit Route Object (ERO) so as to provide the METRIC (path delay, path delay variation, or path loss) for the computed path.
The PCE MAY also insert the METRIC object with a NO PATH object to indicate that the metric constraint could not be satisfied.
The path computation algorithmic aspects used by the PCE to optimize a path with respect to a specific metric are outside the scope of this document.
All the rules of processing the METRIC object as explained in [RFC5440] are applicable to the new metric types as well.
If a PCC sends a path computation request to a PCE where the metric to optimize is the path delay and the path loss must not exceed the value of M, then two METRIC objects are inserted in the PCReq message:
First METRIC object with B 0, T 12, C 1, metric value 0x0000
Second METRIC object with B 1, T 14, metric value M
As per [RFC5440], if a path satisfying the set of constraints can be found by the PCE and there is no policy that prevents the return of the computed metric, then the PCE inserts one METRIC object with B 0, T 12, metric value
Additionally, the PCE MAY insert a second METRIC object with B 1, T 14, metric value computed path loss.
This section defines the following types for the METRIC object to be used for the P2MP TE LSPs.
The P2MP Path Delay metric type of the METRIC object in PCEP encodes the Path Delay metric for the destination that observes the worst delay metric among all destinations of the P2MP tree.
Specifically, extending on the above mentioned terminology:
A P2MP tree T comprises a set of M destinations {Dest j, (j 1...M)}.
The P2P Path Delay metric of the path to destination
Dest j is denoted by PDM(Dest j).
The P2MP Path Delay metric for the P2MP tree T
Maximum {PDM(Dest j), (j 1...M)}.
The value for the P2MP Path Delay metric type (T)   15.
The P2MP Path Delay Variation metric type of the METRIC object in PCEP encodes the Path Delay Variation metric for the destination that observes the worst delay variation metric among all destinations of the P2MP tree.
Specifically, extending on the above mentioned terminology:
A P2MP tree T comprises a set of M destinations {Dest j, (j 1...M)}.
The P2P Path Delay Variation metric of the path to the destination Dest j is denoted by PDVM(Dest j).
The P2MP Path Delay Variation metric for the P2MP tree T
Maximum {PDVM(Dest j), (j 1...M)}.
The value for the P2MP Path Delay Variation metric type (T)   16.
The P2MP Path Loss metric type of the METRIC object in PCEP encodes the path packet loss metric for the destination that observes the worst packet loss metric among all destinations of the P2MP tree.
Specifically, extending on the above mentioned terminology:  A P2MP tree T comprises of a set of M destinations {Dest j, (j 1...M)}.
The P2P Path Loss metric of the path to destination
Dest j is denoted by PLM(Dest j).
Path Loss metric for the P2MP tree T
Maximum {PLM(Dest j), (j 1...M)}.
The value for the P2MP Path Loss metric type (T)   17.
The LBU on a link, forwarding adjacency, or bundled link is populated in the TED ("Unidirectional Utilized Bandwidth Sub TLV" in [RFC7471] and [RFC7810]).
For a link or forwarding adjacency, the bandwidth utilization represents the actual utilization of the link (i.e., as measured in the router).
For a bundled link, the bandwidth utilization is defined to be the sum of the component link bandwidth utilization.
This includes traffic for both RSVP TE and non RSVP TE label switched path packets.
The LBU in percentage is described as the (utilized bandwidth / maximum bandwidth)
The "maximum bandwidth" is defined in [RFC3630] and [RFC5305] and "utilized bandwidth" in [RFC7471] and [RFC7810].
Link Reserved Bandwidth Utilization (LRBU)
The LRBU on a link, forwarding adjacency, or bundled link can be calculated from the TED.
The utilized bandwidth includes traffic for both RSVP TE and non RSVP TE LSPs; the reserved bandwidth utilization considers only the RSVP TE LSPs.
The reserved bandwidth utilization can be calculated by using the residual bandwidth, available bandwidth, and utilized bandwidth described in [RFC7471] and [RFC7810].
The actual bandwidth by non RSVP TE traffic can be calculated by subtracting the available bandwidth from the residual bandwidth ([RFC7471] and [RFC7810]), which is further deducted from utilized bandwidth to get the reserved bandwidth utilization.
Thus, reserved bandwidth utilization   utilized bandwidth (residual bandwidth available bandwidth)
The LRBU in percentage is described as the (reserved bandwidth utilization / maximum reservable bandwidth)
The "maximum reservable bandwidth" is defined in [RFC3630] and [RFC5305].
The "utilized bandwidth", "residual bandwidth", and "available bandwidth" are defined in [RFC7471] and [RFC7810].
Object The BU object is used to indicate the upper limit of the acceptable link bandwidth utilization percentage.
The BU object MAY be carried within the PCReq message and PCRep messages.
BU Object Class is 35.
BU Object Type is 1.
The format of the BU object body is as follows:
This field MUST be set to zero on transmission and MUST be ignored on receipt.
Type (8 bits):  Represents the bandwidth utilization type.
Two values are currently defined.
Bandwidth Utilization (32 bits):  Represents the bandwidth utilization quantified as a percentage (as described in Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2) and encoded in IEEE floating point format (see [IEEE.754]).
The BU object body has a fixed length of 8 bytes.
Elements of Procedure A PCC that wants the PCE to factor in the bandwidth utilization during path computation includes a BU object in the PCReq message.
A PCE that supports this object MUST ensure that no link on the computed path has the LBU or LRBU percentage exceeding the given value.
A PCReq or PCRep message MAY contain multiple BU objects so long as each is for a different bandwidth utilization type.
If a message contains more than one BU object with the same bandwidth utilization type, the first MUST be processed by the receiver and subsequent instances MUST be ignored.
If the BU object is unknown/unsupported, the PCE is expected to follow procedures defined in [RFC5440].
That is, if the P bit is set, the PCE sends a PCErr message with error type 3 or 4
(Unknown / Not supported object) and error value 1 or 2 (unknown / unsupported object class / object type), and the related path computation request will be discarded.
If the P bit is cleared, the PCE is free to ignore the object.
If the PCE understands but does not support path computation requests using the BU object, and the P bit is set in the BU object header, then the PCE MUST send a PCErr message with a PCEP ERROR Object Error Type   4 (Not supported object) with Error value
5 (Unsupported network performance constraint), and
the related path computation request MUST be discarded.
If the PCE understands the BU object but the local policy has been configured on the PCE to not allow network performance constraint, and the P bit is set in the BU object header, then the PCE MUST send a PCErr message with a PCEP ERROR Object Error Type   5 (Policy violation) with Error value   8 (Not allowed network performance constraint).
The path computation request MUST then be canceled.
If path computation is unsuccessful, then a PCE MAY insert a BU object (along with a NO PATH object) into a PCRep message to indicate the constraints that could not be satisfied.
Usage of the BU object for P2MP LSPs is outside the scope of this document.
Objective Functions [RFC5541] defines a mechanism to specify an objective function that is used by a PCE when it computes a path.
The new metric types for path delay and path delay variation can continue to use the existing objective function   Minimum Cost Path (MCP) [RFC5541].
For path loss, the following new OF is defined.
A network comprises a set of N links {Li, (i 1...N)}.
A path P is a list of K links {Lpi,(i 1...K)}.
The percentage link loss of link
The fractional link loss of link
The percentage path loss of a path
P is denoted PL(P), where PL(P)
9 Name: Minimum Packet Loss Path (MPLP)
: Find a path P such that PL(P) is minimized.
namely, the Maximum Under  Utilized Path (MUP) and the Maximum Reserved Under Utilized Path (MRUP) are needed to optimize bandwidth utilization.
These two new objective function codes are defined below.
These objective functions are formulated using the following additional terminology:  The bandwidth utilization on link L is denoted u(L).
The reserved bandwidth utilization on link L is denoted ru(L).
The maximum bandwidth on link L is denoted M(L).
The maximum reservable bandwidth on link L is denoted R(L).
The description of the two new objective functions is as follows.
Maximum Reserved Under Utilized Path
These new objective functions are used to optimize paths based on the bandwidth utilization as the optimization criteria.
If the objective functions defined in this document are unknown/ unsupported by a PCE, then the procedure as defined in Section 3.1.1 of [RFC5541] is followed.
Stateful PCE and PCE Initiated LSPs [RFC8231] specifies a set of extensions to PCEP to enable stateful control of MPLS TE and GMPLS LSPs via PCEP and the maintaining of these LSPs at the stateful PCE.
It further distinguishes between an active and a passive stateful PCE.
A passive stateful PCE uses LSP state information learned from PCCs to optimize path computations but does not actively update LSP state.
In contrast, an active stateful PCE utilizes the LSP delegation mechanism to update LSP parameters in those PCCs that delegated control over their LSPs to the PCE.
[PCE INITIATED] describes the setup, maintenance, and teardown of PCE initiated LSPs under the stateful PCE model.
The document defines the PCInitiate message that is used by a PCE to request a PCC to set up a new LSP.
The new metric type and objective functions defined in this document can also be used with the stateful PCE extensions.
The format of PCEP messages described in [RFC8231] and [PCE INITIATED] uses <intended attribute list> and <attribute list>, respectively, (where the <intended attribute list
> is the attribute list defined in Section 6.5 of [RFC5440] and extended in Section 5.2 of this document) for the purpose of including the service aware parameters.
The stateful PCE implementation MAY use the extension of PCReq and PCRep messages as defined in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 to enable the use of service aware parameters during passive stateful operations.
PCEP Message Extension Message formats in this document are expressed using Routing Backus  Naur Form (RBNF) as used in [RFC5440] and defined in [RFC5511].
The extensions to the PCReq message are:
new metric types using existing METRIC object  a new optional BU object  new objective functions using existing OF object [RFC5541]
The format of the PCReq message (with [RFC5541] and [RFC8231] as a base) is updated as follows:
The extensions to the PCRep message are:
new metric types using existing METRIC object  a new optional BU object (during unsuccessful path computation, to indicate the bandwidth utilization as a reason for failure)
new objective functions using existing OF object [RFC5541]
The format of the PCRep message (with [RFC5541] and [RFC8231] as a base) is updated as follows:
:  <response> [<response list>] <response
PCRpt Message A Path Computation LSP State Report message (also referred to as PCRpt message) is a PCEP message sent by a PCC to a PCE to report the current state or delegate control of an LSP.
The BU object in a PCRpt message specifies the upper limit set at the PCC at the time of LSP delegation to an active stateful PCE.
The format of the PCRpt message is described in [RFC8231], which uses the <intended attribute list>, which is the attribute list defined in Section 6.5 of [RFC5440] and extended by PCEP extensions.
The PCRpt message can use the updated <attribute list> (as extended in Section 5.2) for the purpose of including the BU object.
Inter domain Path Computation [RFC5441] describes the Backward Recursive PCE Based Computation (BRPC) procedure to compute an end to end optimized inter domain path by cooperating PCEs.
The new metric types defined in this document can be applied to end to end path computation, in a similar manner to the existing IGP or TE metrics.
The new BU object defined in this document can be applied to end to end path computation, in a similar manner to a METRIC object with its B bit set to 1.
All domains should have the same understanding of the METRIC (path delay variation, etc.)
and the BU object for end to end inter domain path computation to make sense.
Otherwise, some form of metric normalization as described in [RFC5441] MUST be applied.
The IGP in each neighbor domain can advertise its inter domain TE link capabilities.
This has been described in [RFC5316]
(IS IS) and [RFC5392] (OSPF).
The network performance link properties are described in [RFC7471] and [RFC7810].
The same properties must be advertised using the mechanism described in [RFC5392] (OSPF) and [RFC5316]
Inter Layer Path Computation [RFC5623] provides a framework for PCE based inter layer MPLS and GMPLS traffic engineering.
Lower layer LSPs that are advertised as TE links into the higher layer network form a Virtual Network Topology (VNT).
The advertisement into the higher layer network should include network performance link properties based on the end to end metric of the lower layer LSP.
Note that the new metrics defined in this document are applied to end to end path computation, even though the path may cross multiple layers.
Reoptimizing Paths [RFC6374] defines the measurement of loss, delay, and related metrics over LSPs.
A PCC can utilize these measurement techniques.
In case it detects a degradation of network performance parameters relative to the value of the constraint it gave when the path was set up, or relative to an implementation specific threshold, it MAY ask the PCE to reoptimize the path by sending a PCReq with the R bit set in the RP object, as per [RFC5440].
A PCC may also detect the degradation of an LSP without making any direct measurements, by monitoring the TED (as populated by the IGP) for changes in the network performance parameters of the links that carry its LSPs.
The PCC can issue a reoptimization request for any impacted LSPs.
For example, a PCC can monitor the link bandwidth utilization along the path by monitoring changes in the bandwidth utilization parameters of one or more links on the path in the TED.
If the bandwidth utilization percentage of any of the links in the path changes to a value less than that required when the path was set up, or otherwise less than an implementation specific threshold, then the PCC can issue a reoptimization request to a PCE.
A stateful PCE can also determine which LSPs should be reoptimized based on network events or triggers from external monitoring systems.
For example, when a particular link deteriorates and its loss increases, this can trigger the stateful PCE to automatically determine which LSPs are impacted and should be reoptimized.
METRIC Types IANA maintains the "Path Computation Element Protocol (PCEP) Numbers" registry at <http://www.iana.org/assignments/pcep
Within this registry, IANA maintains a subregistry for "METRIC Object T Field".
Six new metric types are defined in this document for the METRIC object (specified in [RFC5440]).
IANA has made the following allocations:
Object IANA maintains Object Types within the "PCEP Objects" registry.
IANA has made the following allocation:
BU Object IANA has created a new subregistry, named "BU Object Type Field", within the "Path Computation Element Protocol (PCEP) Numbers" registry to manage the Type field of the BU object.
New values are to be assigned by Standards Action [RFC8126].
Each value should be tracked with the following qualities:  Type  Name  Reference
The following values are defined in this document:
IANA maintains the "Objective Function" subregistry (described in [RFC5541]) within the "Path Computation Element Protocol (PCEP) Numbers" registry.
Three new objective functions have been defined in this document.
IANA has made the following allocations:
New Error Values IANA maintains a registry of Error Types and Error values for use in PCEP messages.
This is maintained as the "PCEP ERROR Object Error Types and Values" subregistry of the "Path Computation Element Protocol (PCEP) Numbers" registry.
IANA has made the following allocations: Two new Error values are defined for the Error Type "Not supported object" (type 4) and "Policy violation" (type 5).
This document defines new METRIC types, a new BU object, and new OF codes that do not add any new security concerns beyond those discussed in [RFC5440] and [RFC5541] in itself.
Some deployments may find the service aware information like delay and packet loss to be extra sensitive and could be used to influence path computation and setup with adverse effect.
Additionally, snooping of PCEP messages with such data or using PCEP messages for network reconnaissance may give an attacker sensitive information about the operations of the network.
Thus, such deployment should employ suitable PCEP security mechanisms like TCP Authentication Option (TCP AO)
The procedure based on Transport Layer Security (TLS) in [PCEPS] is considered a security enhancement and thus is much better suited for the sensitive service aware information.
Control of Function and Policy
The only configurable item is the support of the new constraints on a PCE, which MAY be controlled by a policy module on an individual basis.
If the new constraint is not supported/allowed on a PCE, it MUST send a PCErr message accordingly.
9.2.  Information and Data Models
[RFC7420] describes the PCEP MIB.
There are no new MIB Objects for this document.
Liveness Detection and Monitoring The mechanisms defined in this document do not imply any new liveness detection and monitoring requirements in addition to those already listed in [RFC5440].
The mechanisms defined in this document do not imply any new operation verification requirements in addition to those already listed in [RFC5440].
The PCE requires the TED to be populated with network performance information like link latency, delay variation, packet loss, and utilized bandwidth.
This mechanism is described in [RFC7471] and [RFC7810].
The mechanisms defined in this document do not have any impact on network operations in addition to those already listed in [RFC5440].
PCEP Requirements End to end service optimization based on latency,
delay variation, packet loss, and link bandwidth utilization are key requirements for service providers.
The following associated key requirements are identified for PCEP:
A PCE supporting this specification MUST have the capability to compute end to end paths with latency, delay variation, packet loss, and bandwidth utilization constraints.
A PCC MUST be able to specify any network performance constraint in a PCReq message to be applied during the path computation.
A PCC MUST be able to request that a PCE optimizes a path using any network performance criteria.
A PCE that supports this specification is not required to provide service aware path computation to any PCC at any time.
Therefore, it MUST be possible for a PCE to reject a PCReq message with a reason code that indicates service aware path computation is not supported.
Furthermore, a PCE that does not support this specification will either ignore or reject such requests using pre existing mechanisms; therefore, the requests MUST be identifiable to legacy PCEs, and rejections by legacy PCEs MUST be acceptable within this specification.
A PCE SHOULD be able to return end to end network performance information of the computed path in a PCRep message.
A PCE SHOULD be able to compute multi domain (e.g., Inter AS, Inter Area, or Multi Layer)
Such constraints are only meaningful if used consistently: for instance, if the delay of a computed path segment is exchanged between two PCEs residing in different domains, a consistent way of defining the delay must be used.
Contributors Clarence Filsfils Cisco Systems Email:
Siva Sivabalan Cisco Systems Email:
George Swallow Cisco Systems Email:
Stefano Previdi Cisco Systems, Inc Via Del Serafico 200
Udayasree Palle Huawei Technologies Divyashree Techno Park, Whitefield Bangalore, Karnataka
udayasree.palle@huawei.com Avantika Huawei Technologies Divyashree Techno Park, Whitefield Bangalore, Karnataka
avantika.sushilkumar@huawei.com Xian Zhang Huawei Technologies F3 1 B R&D Center, Huawei Base Bantian, Longgang District Shenzhen, Guangdong  518129
