Request for Comments Summary RFC Numbers 2400
2499 Status of This Memo
This RFC is a slightly annotated list of the 100 RFCs from RFC 2400 through RFCs 2499.
This is a status report on these RFCs.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
Note Many RFCs, but not all, are Proposed Standards, Draft Standards, or Standards.
Since the status of these RFCs may change during the standards processing, we note here only that they are on the standards track.
Please see the latest edition of "Internet Official Protocol Standards" for the current state and status of these RFCs.
In the following, RFCs on the standards track are marked [STANDARDS  TRACK].
It builds on notions introduced and discussed in RFC 2330, the IPPM framework document.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This memo specifies a frame format for transmission of IPv6 packets and the method of forming IPv6 link local and statelessly autoconfigured addresses on ARCnet networks.
It also specifies the content of the Source/Target Link layer Address option used by the Router Solicitation, Router Advertisement, Neighbor Solicitation, Neighbor Advertisement and Redirect messages described in, when those messages are transmitted on an ARCnet.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes objects used for managing DS3 and E3 interfaces.
This document is a companion document with Definitions of Managed Objects for the DS0 (RFC 2494), DS1/E1/DS2/E2 (RFC 2495), and the work in progress SONET/SDH Interface Types.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes objects used for managing DS1, E1, DS2 and E2 interfaces.
This document is a companion document with Definitions of Managed Objects for the DS0 (RFC 2494), DS3/E3 (RFC 2496), and the work in progress, SONET/SDH Interface Types.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes objects used for managing DS0 and DS0 Bundle interfaces.
This document is a companion document with Definitions of Managed Objects for the DS1/E1/DS2/E2 (RFC 2495), DS3/E3 (RFC 2496), and the work in progress, SONET/SDH Interface Types.
Based on 15 Minute Intervals This document defines a set of Textual Conventions for MIB modules which make use of performance history data based on 15 minute intervals.
This document is a companion to the ION working group's architecture document, "IPv6 over Non Broadcast Multiple Access (NBMA) networks".
It provides specific details on how to apply the IPv6 over NBMA architecture to ATM networks.
This architecture allows conventional host side operation of the IPv6 Neighbor Discovery protocol, while also supporting the establishment of 'shortcut' ATM forwarding paths (when using SVCs).
Operation over administratively configured Point to Point PVCs is also supported.
IPv6 over Non Broadcast Multiple Access (NBMA) networks
This document describes a general architecture for IPv6 over NBMA networks.
This document describes a detailed model of IPv4 multicast with RSVP that has been developed using the OPNET simulation package, with protocol procedures defined in the C language.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes the procedure for defining new DHCP options.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
using Standard Mechanisms The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) provides reliable delivery of data across any network path, including network paths containing satellite channels.
While TCP works over satellite channels there are several IETF standardized mechanisms that enable TCP to more effectively utilize the available capacity of the network path.
This document outlines some of these TCP mitigations.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
This document describes an extension to the SMTP service that allows an SMTP server and client to use transport layer security to provide private, authenticated communication over the Internet.
This gives SMTP agents the ability to protect some or all of their communications from eavesdroppers and attackers.
This document proposes syntax for the Network Access Identifier (NAI), the userID submitted by the client during PPP authentication.
This document defines a DHCP option that contains a list of pointers to User Authentication Protocol servers that provide user authentication services for clients that conform to The Open Group Network Computing Client Technical Standard.
The Point to Point Protocol (PPP) provides a standard method for transporting multi protocol datagrams over point to point links.
PPP also defines an extensible Link Control Protocol (LCP), which allows negotiation of an Authentication Protocol for authenticating its peer before allowing Network Layer protocols to transmit over the link.
One might also ask for and get a list of other identifiers that are aliases for the original URI or a bibliographic description of the resource the URI denotes, for example.
This applies to both Uniform Resource Names (URNs) and Uniform Resource Locators (URLs).
Uniform Resource Characteristics (URCs) are discussed in this document but only as descriptions of resources rather than identifiers.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document proposed a mechanism for language tagging in plain text.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
A Proposal to add Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP
This note describes a proposed addition of ECN (Explicit Congestion Notification) to IP.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This document examines the problems associated with use of MIME security multiparts and gateways to non MIME environments.
Independent Data Unit Protection Generic Security Service Application Program Interface (IDUP GSS API)
The IDUP GSS API extends the GSS API for applications requiring protection of a generic data unit (such as a file or message) in a way which is independent of the protection of any other data unit and independent of any concurrent contact with designated "receivers" of the data unit.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document specifies a Security Negotiation Mechanism for the Generic Security Service Application Program Interface (GSS API).
This document describes requirements for the provisioning of "roaming capability" for dialup Internet users.
"Roaming capability" is defined as the ability to use multiple Internet service providers (ISPs), while maintaining a formal, customer vendor relationship with only one.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo describes a low cost, deterministic means for messages to be identified as submissions, and specifies what actions are to be taken by a submission server.
This document defines an architecture for implementing scalable service differentiation in the Internet.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document defines the IP header field, called the DS (for differentiated services) field.
This document defines the model and generic mechanisms for IPv6 encapsulation of Internet packets, such as IPv6 and IPv4.
This document defines the method for transmission of IP Version 6 packets over PPP links as well as the Network Control Protocol (NCP) for establishing and configuring the IPv6 over PPP.
It also specifies the method of forming IPv6 link local addresses on PPP links.
This document describes an allocation plan for IPv6 addresses to be used in testing IPv6 prototype software.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This memo specifies the MTU and frame format for transmission of IPv6 packets on Token Ring networks.
On The Canonical Ordering Of Link Layer
Addresses Protocols such as ARP and Neighbor Discovery
have data fields that contain link layer addresses.
In order to interoperate properly, a sender setting such a field must insure that the receiver extracts those bits and interprets them correctly.
In most cases, such fields must be in "canonical form".
Unfortunately, not all LAN adaptors are consistent in their use of canonical form, and implementations may need to explicitly bit swap individual bytes in order to obtain the correct format.
This document provides information to implementors to help them avoid the pitfall of using non canonical forms when canonical forms are required.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
A long time ago, in a network, far far away, a great adventure took place!.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document specifies the frame format for transmission of IPv6 packets and the method of forming IPv6 link local addresses and statelessly autoconfigured addresses on FDDI networks.
This document is one in the series of documents that define various MIB object groups for IPv6.
Specifically, the ICMPv6 group is defined in this document.
Textual Conventions and General Group
This document is one in the series of documents that provide MIB definitions for for IP Version 6.
Specifically, the IPv6 MIB textual conventions as well as the IPv6 MIB General group is defined in this document.
This document specifies the frame format for transmission of IPv6 packets and the method of forming IPv6 link local addresses and statelessly autoconfigured addresses on Ethernet networks.
It also specifies the content of the Source/Target Link layer Address option used in Router Solicitation, Router Advertisement, Neighbor Solicitation, Neighbor Advertisement and Redirect messages when those messages are transmitted on an Ethernet.
This document specifies a set of Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) messages for use with version 6 of the Internet Protocol (IPv6).
This document specifies the steps a host takes in deciding how to autoconfigure its interfaces in IP version 6.
Neighbor Discovery for IP Version 6
This document specifies the Neighbor Discovery protocol for IP Version 6.
This document specifies version 6 of the Internet Protocol (IPv6), also sometimes referred to as IP Next Generation or IPng.
This memo profiles the X.509 v3 certificate and X.509 v2 CRL for use in the Internet.
Toward the PSTN/Internet Inter Networking
This document contains the information relevant to the development of the inter networking interfaces underway in the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)/Internet Inter Networking (PINT)
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it defines objects for monitoring and controlling network devices with APPN (Advanced Peer to Peer Network)
EBN (Extended Border Node) capabilities.
This memo identifies managed objects for the EBN architecture.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it defines objects for receiving notifications from network devices with APPN (Advanced Peer to Peer Network) and DLUR (Dependent LU Requester) capabilities.
This memo identifies notifications for the APPN and DLUR architecture.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it defines objects for monitoring and controlling network devices with APPN (Advanced Peer to Peer Networking)
This memo identifies managed objects for the APPN protocol.
This document is one in the series of documents that define various MIB objects for IPv6.
Specifically, this document is the MIB module which defines managed objects for implementations of the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) over IP Version 6 (IPv6).
This document specifies an extension of the Routing Information Protocol (RIP) to expand the amount of useful information carried in RIP messages and to add a measure of security.
This document is one in the series of documents that define various MIB objects for IPv6.
Specifically, this document is the MIB module which defines managed objects for implementations of the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) over IP Version 6 (IPv6).
The ESP CBC Mode Cipher Algorithms
This document describes how to use CBC mode cipher algorithms with the IPSec ESP (Encapsulating Security Payload) Protocol.
It not only clearly states how to use certain cipher algorithms, but also how to use all CBC mode cipher algorithms.
This document proposes rules for Top Level Aggregation Identifiers (TLA ID) and Next Level Aggregation Identifiers (NLA ID).
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo updates RFC 1939 to define a mechanism to announce support for optional commands, extensions, and unconditional server behavior.
AT&T's Error Resilient Video Transmission Technique
This document describes a set of techniques for packet loss resilient transmission of compressed video bitstreams based on reliable delivery of their vital information carrying segments.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
iCalendar Message Based Interoperability Protocol (iMIP)
This document specifies a binding from the iCalendar Transport  independent Interoperability Protocol (iTIP) to Internet email based transports.
iCalendar Transport Independent Interoperability Protocol (iTIP) Scheduling Events, BusyTime,
To dos and Journal Entries
This document specifies how calendaring systems use iCalendar objects to interoperate with other calendar systems.
It does so in a general way so as to allow multiple methods of communication between systems.
This memo has been defined to provide the definition of a common format for openly exchanging calendaring and scheduling information across the Internet.
The One Time Password SASL Mechanism OTP provides a useful authentication mechanism for situations where there is limited client or server trust.
Currently, OTP is added to protocols in an ad hoc fashion with heuristic parsing.
This specification defines an OTP SASL mechanism so it can be easily and formally integrated into many application protocols.
Distributed MARS Service Using SCSP
This document describes a method for distributing a MARS service within a LIS.
This method uses the Server Cache Synchronization Protocol (SCSP) to synchronize the MARS Server databases within a LIS.
When SCSP is used to synchronize the caches of MARS Servers in a LIS, the LIS defines the boundary of an SCSP Server Group (SG).
The Batch SMTP Media Type
This document defines a MIME content type suitable for tunneling an ESMTP transaction through any MIME capable transport.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document is maintained in order to publish all necessary information needed to develop interoperable applications based on the OpenPGP format.
It also discusses the rationale for this process.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
RSA Cryptography Specifications Version 2.0
This memo is the successor to RFC 2313.
This document provides recommendations for the implementation of public key cryptography based on the RSA algorithm.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document describes the collaboration process between the ITU T and ISOC/IETF.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo describes the RTP payload format for JPEG video streams.
This document discusses issues that should be considered in formulating a policy for assigning values to a name space and provides guidelines to document authors on the specific text that must be included in documents that place demands on the IANA.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
The Point to Point Protocol (PPP) provides a standard method for transporting multi protocol datagrams over point to point links.
PPP defines an extensible Link Control Protocol and a family of Network Control Protocols (NCPs) for establishing and configuring different network layer protocols.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
Benchmarking The purpose of this document is to define terminology specific to the benchmarking of multicast IP forwarding devices.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document specifies the RTP payload format for encapsulating ITU Recommendation BT.656 3 video streams in the Real Time Transport Protocol (RTP).
This document describes the Provider Architecture for Differentiated Services and Traffic Engineering (PASTE) for Internet Service Providers (ISPs).
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document specifies an RTP payload header format applicable to the transmission of video streams generated based on the 1998 version of ITU T Recommendation H.263.
This paper specifies extensions to FTP that will allow the protocol to work over IPv4 and IPv6.
This memo describes an encapsulation method for carrying network interconnect traffic over a Frame Relay backbone.
It covers aspects of both Bridging and Routing.
This memo defines the profile of the MIME Content Type for directory information for a white pages person object, based on a vCard electronic business card.
A MIME Content Type for Directory Information
This document defines a MIME Content Type for holding directory information.
This document describes the MIME header Content Duration that is intended for use with any timed media content (typically audio/  or video/ ).
This document describes the registration of the MIME sub type multipart/voice message for use with the Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM).
This document describes the registration of the MIME sub type audio/32KADPCM for toll quality audio.
This document profiles Internet mail for voice messaging.
The PPP Triple DES Encryption Protocol (3DESE)
This document provides specific details for the use of the Triple DES standard (3DES) for encrypting PPP encapsulated packets.
The PPP DES Encryption Protocol, Version 2 (DESE bis)
This document provides specific details for the use of the DES standard for encrypting
This document describes the guidelines and procedures for formation and operation of IETF working groups.
This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
This memo specifies a MIB module in a manner that is both compliant to the SNMPv2 SMI, and semantically identical to the peer SNMPv1 definitions.
When TCP Starts Up With Four Packets Into Only Three Buffers
This memo is to document a simple experiment.
The experiment showed that in the case of a TCP receiver behind a 9600 bps modem link at the edge of a fast Internet where there are only 3 buffers before the modem (and the fourth packet of a four packet start will surely be dropped), no significant degradation in performance is experienced by a TCP sending with a four packet start when compared with a normal slow start (which starts with just one packet).
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document covers some simulation studies of the effects of increasing the initial window size of TCP.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document specifies an increase in the permitted initial window for TCP from one segment to roughly 4K bytes.
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
This is the first of a set of Informational RFCs describing the Dublin Core.
Its purpose is to introduce the Dublin Core and to describe the consensus reached on the semantics of each of the 15 elements.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The OAKLEY Key Determination Protocol
This document describes a protocol, named OAKLEY, by which two authenticated parties can agree on secure and secret keying material.
The basic mechanism is the Diffie Hellman key exchange algorithm.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This document is intended to provide guidelines for the development of collateral specifications describing the use of new encryption and authentication algorithms with the ESP protocol, described in and new authentication algorithms used with the AH protocol.
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
The NULL Encryption Algorithm and Its Use With IPsec
This memo defines the NULL encryption algorithm and its use with the IPsec Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP).
The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)
This memo describes a hybrid protocol.
The purpose is to negotiate, and provide authenticated keying material for, security associations in a protected manner.
This memo describes a protocol utilizing security concepts necessary for establishing Security Associations (SA) and cryptographic keys in an Internet environment.
The Internet IP Security Domain of Interpretation for ISAKMP
This document defines the Internet IP Security DOI (IPSEC DOI), which instantiates ISAKMP for use with IP when IP uses ISAKMP to negotiate security associations.
IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)
The Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) header is designed to provide a mix of security services in IPv4 and IPv6.
The ESP DES CBC Cipher Algorithm With Explicit IV
This document describes the use of the DES Cipher algorithm in Cipher Block Chaining Mode, with an explicit IV, as a confidentiality mechanism within the context of the IPSec Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP).
The Use of HMAC SHA 1 96 within ESP and AH
This memo describes the use of the HMAC algorithm in conjunction with the SHA 1 algorithm as an authentication mechanism within the revised IPSEC Encapsulating Security Payload and the revised IPSEC Authentication Header.
The Use of HMAC MD5 96 within ESP and AH
This memo describes the use of the HMAC algorithm in conjunction with the MD5 algorithm as an authentication mechanism within the revised IPSEC Encapsulating Security Payload and the revised IPSEC Authentication Header.
The IP Authentication Header (AH) is used to provide connectionless integrity and data origin authentication for IP datagrams (hereafter referred to as just "authentication"), and to provide protection against replays.
This memo specifies the base architecture for IPsec compliant systems.
This memo describes the state of standardization of protocols used in the Internet as determined by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB).
This memo is an Internet Standard.
This memo does not affect the technical security of the Internet, but it does cite some security specifications.
Author's Address Alegre Ramos University of Southern California Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
Full Copyright Statement Copyright (C)
This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works.
However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than English.
The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS
ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
Acknowledgement Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the Internet Society.
