Constraint based Routed Label Distribution Protocol (CR LDP)
This document describes extensions to Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) Constraint based Routed Label Distribution Protocol (CR LDP) signaling required to support Generalized MPLS.
Generalized MPLS extends the MPLS control plane to encompass time division (e.g., Synchronous Optical Network and Synchronous Digital Hierarchy, SONET/SDH), wavelength (optical lambdas) and spatial switching (e.g., incoming port or fiber to outgoing port or fiber).
This document presents a CR LDP specific description of the extensions.
A generic functional description can be found in separate documents.
Introduction Generalized MPLS extends MPLS from supporting packet (PSC) interfaces and switching to include support of three new classes of interfaces and switching: Time Division Multiplex (TDM), Lambda Switch (LSC) and Fiber Switch (FSC).
A functional description of the extensions to MPLS signaling needed to support the new classes of interfaces and switching is provided in [RFC3471].
This document presents CR LDP specific formats and mechanisms needed to support all four classes of interfaces.
RSVP TE extensions can be found in [RFC3473].
[RFC3471] should be viewed as a companion document to this document.
The format of this document parallels [RFC3471].
It should be noted that the RSVP TE specific version of Generalized MPLS includes RSVP specific support for rapid failure notification, see Section 4 [RFC3473].
For CR LDP there is not currently a similar mechanism.
When a failure is detected it will be propagated with RELEASE/WITHDRAW messages radially outward from the point of failure.
Resources are to be released in this phase and actual resource information may be fed back to the source using a feedback mechanisms.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
This section defines formats for a generalized label request, a generalized label, support for waveband switching, suggested label and label sets.
Generalized Label Request A REQUEST message SHOULD contain as specific an LSP (Label Switched Path) Encoding Type as possible to allow the maximum flexibility in switching by transit LSRs.
A Generalized Label Request Type, Length, and Value (TLV) is set by the ingress node, transparently passed by transit nodes, and used by the egress node.
The Switching Type field may also be updated hop by hop.
Procedures A node processing a REQUEST message containing a Generalized Label Request must verify that the requested parameters can be satisfied by the incoming interface, the node and by the outgoing interface.
The node may either directly support the LSP or it may use a tunnel (FA), i.e., another class of switching.
In either case, each parameter must be checked.
Note that local node policy dictates when tunnels may be used and when they may be created.
Local policy may allow for tunnels to be dynamically established or may be solely administratively controlled.
For more information on tunnels and processing of ER (Explicit Route) hops when using tunnels see [MPLS HIERARCHY].
Transit and egress nodes MUST verify that the node itself and, where appropriate, that the outgoing interface or tunnel can support the requested LSP Encoding Type.
If encoding cannot be supported, the node MUST generate a NOTIFICATION message, with a "Routing problem/Unsupported Encoding" indication.
Nodes MUST verify that the type indicated in the Switching Type parameter is supported on the corresponding incoming interface.
If the type cannot be supported, the node MUST generate a NOTIFICATION message with a "Routing problem/Switching Type" indication.
The G PID parameter is normally only examined at the egress.
If the indicated G PID cannot be supported then the egress MUST generate a NOTIFICATION message, with a "Routing problem/Unsupported G PID" indication.
In the case of PSC and when penultimate hop popping (PHP) is requested, the penultimate hop also examines the (stored) G PID during the processing of the MAPPING message.
In this case if the G PID is not supported, then the penultimate hop MUST generate a NOTIFICATION message with a "Routing problem/Unacceptable label value" indication.
The generated NOTIFICATION message MAY include an Acceptable Label Set, see Section 4.
When an error message is not generated, normal processing occurs.
In the transit case this will typically result in a REQUEST message being propagated.
In the egress case and PHP special case this will typically result in a MAPPING message being generated.
Bandwidth Encoding Bandwidth encodings are carried in the CR LDP Traffic Parameters TLV.
See [RFC3471] for a definition of values to be used for specific signal types.
These values are set in the Peak and Committed Data Rate fields of the Traffic Parameters TLV.
Other bandwidth/service related parameters in the TLV are ignored and carried transparently.
See [RFC3471] for a description of parameters and encoding of labels.
The Generalized Label travels in the upstream direction in MAPPING messages.
The presence of both a generalized and normal label TLV in a MAPPING message is a protocol error and should treated as a malformed message by the recipient.
The recipient of a MAPPING message containing a Generalized Label verifies that the values passed are acceptable.
If the label is unacceptable then the recipient MUST generate a NOTIFICATION message with a "Routing problem/MPLS label allocation failure" indication.
The generated NOTIFICATION message MAY include an Acceptable Label Set, see Section 4. 2.3.
Waveband Switching Waveband switching uses the same format as the generalized label, see section 2.2.
The type 0x0828 is assigned for the Waveband Label.
In the context of waveband switching, the generalized label has the following format:
See [RFC3471] for a description of parameters.
The procedures defined in Section 2.2.1 apply to waveband switching.
This includes generating a NOTIFICATION message with a "Routing problem/MPLS label allocation failure" indication if any of the label fields are unrecognized or unacceptable.
Additionally, when a waveband is switched to another waveband, it is possible that the wavelengths within the waveband will be mirrored about a center frequency.
When this type of switching is employed, the start and end label in the waveband label TLV MUST be swapped before forwarding the label TLV with the new waveband
In this manner an egress/ingress LSR that receives a waveband label which has these values inverted, knows that it must also invert its egress association to pick up the proper wavelengths.
Without this mechanism and with an odd number of mirrored switching operations, the egress LSRs will not know that an input wavelength of say L1 will emerge from the waveband tunnel as L100.
This operation MUST be performed in both directions when a bidirectional waveband tunnel is being established.
The format of a suggested label is identical to a generalized label.
It is used in REQUEST messages.
Suggested Label uses type   0x904.
Errors in received Suggested Labels MUST be ignored.
This includes any received inconsistent or unacceptable values.
Per [RFC3471], if a downstream node passes a label value that differs from the suggested label upstream, the upstream LSR MUST either reconfigure itself so that it uses the label specified by the downstream node or generate a NOTIFICATION message with a "Routing problem/Unacceptable label value" indication.
Furthermore, an ingress node SHOULD NOT transmit data traffic using a suggested label until the downstream node passes corresponding a label upstream.
14 bits Indicates the type and format of the labels carried in the TLV.
Values match the TLV type of the appropriate Label TLV.
See [RFC3471] for a description of other parameters.
Procedures A Label Set is defined via one or more Label Set TLVs.
/subchannels can be added to or excluded from a Label Set via Action zero (0) and one (1) TLVs respectively.
Ranges of labels/subchannels can be added to or excluded from a Label Set via Action two (2) and three (3) TLVs respectively.
When the Label Set TLVs only list labels/subchannels to exclude, this implies that all other labels are acceptable.
The absence of any Label Set TLVs implies that all labels are acceptable.
A Label Set is included when a node wishes to restrict the label(s) that may be used downstream.
On reception of a REQUEST message, the receiving node will restrict its choice of labels to one, which is in the Label Set.
Nodes capable of performing label conversion may also remove the Label Set prior to forwarding the REQUEST message.
If the node is unable to pick a label from the Label Set or if there is a problem parsing the Label Set TLVs, then the request is terminated and a NOTIFICATION message with a "Routing problem/Label Set" indication MUST be generated.
It is a local matter if the Label Set is stored for later selection on the MAPPING message or if the selection is made immediately for propagation in the MAPPING message.
On reception of a REQUEST message, the Label Set represented in the message is compared against the set of available labels at the downstream interface and the resulting intersecting Label Set is forwarded in a REQUEST message.
When the resulting Label Set is empty, the REQUEST must be terminated, and a NOTIFICATION message, and a "Routing problem/Label Set" indication MUST be generated.
Note that intersection is based on the physical labels (actual wavelength/band values) which may have different logical values on different links,
as a result it is the responsibility of the node to map these values so that they have a consistent physical meaning, or to drop the particular values from the set if no suitable logical label value exists.
When processing a MAPPING message at an intermediate node, the label propagated upstream MUST fall within the Label Set.
Note, on reception of a MAPPING message a node that is incapable of performing label conversion has no other choice than to use the same physical label (wavelength/band) as received in the MAPPING message.
In this case, the use and propagation of a Label Set will significantly reduce the chances that this allocation will fail.
Bidirectional LSPs Bidirectional LSP setup is indicated by the presence of an Upstream Label in the REQUEST message.
An Upstream Label has the same format as the generalized label, see Section 2.2.
Upstream Label uses type   0x0826.
The process of establishing a bidirectional LSP follows the establishment of a unidirectional LSP with some additions.
an Upstream Label is added to the REQUEST message.
The Upstream Label MUST indicate a label that is valid for forwarding at the time the REQUEST message is sent.
When a REQUEST message containing an Upstream Label is received, the receiver first verifies that the upstream label is acceptable.
If the label is not acceptable, the receiver MUST issue a NOTIFICATION message with a "Routing problem/Unacceptable label value" indication.
The generated NOTIFICATION message MAY include an Acceptable Label Set, see Section 4.
An intermediate node must also allocate a label on the outgoing interface and establish internal data paths before filling in an outgoing Upstream Label and propagating the REQUEST message.
If an intermediate node is unable to allocate a label or internal resources, then it MUST issue a NOTIFICATION message with a "Routing problem/Label allocation failure" indication.
Terminator nodes process REQUEST messages as usual, with the exception that the upstream label can immediately be used to transport data traffic associated with the LSP upstream towards the initiator.
When a bidirectional LSP is removed, both upstream and downstream labels are invalidated and it is no longer valid to send data using the associated labels.
This section defines the Acceptable Label Set TLV to support Notification on Label Error per [RFC3471].
An Acceptable Label Set TLV uses a type value of 0x082a.
The remaining contents of the TLV have the identical format as the Label Set TLV, see Section 2.5.
Acceptable Label Set TLVs may be carried in NOTIFICATION messages.
The procedures for defining an Acceptable Label Set follow the procedures for defining a Label Set, see Section 2.5.1.
Specifically, an Acceptable Label Set is defined via one or more Acceptable Label Set TLVs.
/subchannels can be added to or excluded from an Acceptable Label Set via Action zero (0) and one (1) TLVs respectively.
Ranges of labels/subchannels can be added to or excluded from an Acceptable Label Set via Action two (2) and three (3) TLVs respectively.
When the Acceptable Label Set TLVs only list labels/subchannels to exclude, this implies that all other labels are acceptable.
The inclusion of Acceptable Label Set TLVs is optional.
If included, the NOTIFICATION message SHOULD contain a "Routing problem/Unacceptable label value" indication.
The absence of Acceptable Label Set TLVs does not have any specific meaning.
The Label ER Hop TLV is defined as follows:
See [RFC3471] for a description of L, U and Label
The Label ER Hop follows a ER Hop containing the IP address, or the interface identifier [MPLS UNNUM], associated with the link on which it is to be used.
Up to two label ER Hops may be present, one for the downstream label and one for the upstream label.
The following SHOULD result in "Bad EXPLICIT ROUTE" errors:
If the first label ER Hop is not preceded by a ER Hop containing an IP address, or a interface identifier [MPLS UNNUM], associated with an output link.
For a label ER Hop to follow a ER Hop that has the L bit set.
On unidirectional LSP setup, for there to be a label ER Hop with the U bit set.
For there to be two label ER Hops with the same U bit values.
To support the label ER Hop, a node must check to see if the ER Hop following
its associate address/interface is a label ER Hop.
If it is, one ER Hop is examined for unidirectional LSPs and two ER Hops for bidirectional LSPs.
If the U bit of the ER Hop being examined is clear (0), then value of the label is copied into a new Label Set TLV.
This Label Set TLV MUST be included on the corresponding outgoing REQUEST message.
If the U bit of the ER Hop being examined is set (1), then value of the label is label to be used for upstream traffic associated with the bidirectional LSP.
If this label is not acceptable, a "Bad EXPLICIT ROUTE" error SHOULD be generated.
If the label is acceptable, the label is copied into a new Upstream Label TLV.
This Upstream Label TLV MUST be included on the corresponding outgoing REQUEST message.
After processing, the label ER Hops are removed from the ER.
Note an implication of the above procedures is that the label ER Hop should never be the first ER Hop in a newly received message.
If the label ER Hop is the first ER Hop an a received ER, then it SHOULD be treated as a "Bad strict node" error.
Procedures by which an LSR at the head end of an LSP obtains the information needed to construct the Label ER Hop are outside the scope of this document.
The use of the Protection TLV is optional.
The TLV is included to indicate specific protection attributes of an LSP.
See [RFC3471] for a description of parameters.
Procedures Transit nodes processing a REQUEST message containing a Protection TLV MUST verify that the requested protection can be satisfied by the outgoing interface or tunnel (FA).
If it cannot, the node MUST generate a NOTIFICATION message, with a "Routing problem/Unsupported Link Protection" indication.
Administrative Status Information Administrative Status Information is carried in the Admin Status TLV.
The TLV provides information related to the administrative state of a particular LSP.
The information is used in two ways.
In the first, the TLV is carried in REQUEST and MAPPING messages to indicate the administrative state of an LSP.
In the second, the TLV is carried in Notification message to request a change to the administrative state of an LSP.
The use of the Admin Status TLV is optional.
See [RFC3471] for a description of parameters.
REQUEST and MAPPING Message Procedures
The Admin Status TLV is used to notify each node along the path of the status of the LSP.
Each node processes status information based on local policy and then propagated in the corresponding outgoing messages.
The TLV is inserted in REQUEST messages at the discretion of the ingress node.
The absence of the TLV is the equivalent to receiving a TLV containing values all set to zero.
Transit nodes receiving a REQUEST message containing an Admin Status TLV, update their local state, take any appropriate local action based on the indicated status and then propagate the received Admin Status TLV in the outgoing REQUEST message.
Edge nodes receiving a REQUEST message containing an Admin Status TLV, also update their local state and take any appropriate local action based on the indicated status.
When the ADMIN Status TLV is received with the R bit set, the receiving edge node should reflect the received values in a corresponding MAPPING message.
Specifically, if an egress node receives a Request message with the R bit of the Admin Status TLV set and the node the node SHOULD send a Mapping message containing an Admin Status TLV with the same values set, with the exception of the R bit, as received in the corresponding Request message.
In some circumstances, particularly optical networks, it is useful to set the administrative status of an LSP before tearing it down.
In such circumstances the procedure SHOULD be followed when deleting an LSP from the ingress:
The ingress node precedes an LSP deletion by inserting an Admin Status TLV in a Notification Message setting the Reflect (R) and Delete (D) bits.
Transit nodes process the Admin Status TLV by passing the Notification message.
The egress node May respond with a Notification message with the Admin Status TLV.
Upon receiving the Admin Status TLV with the Delete (D) bit set in the Notification message, the egress SHOULD respond with a LABEL WITHDRAW message and normal CR LDP processing takes place.
In such circumstances the procedure SHOULD be followed when deleting an LSP from the egress:
The egress node indicates its desire for deletion by inserting an Admin Status TLV in a Notification message and setting Delete (D) bit.
Transit nodes process the Admin Status TLV as described above.
Upon receiving the Admin Status TLV with the Delete (D) bit set in the Notification message, the ingress node sends a LABEL RELEASE message downstream to remove the LSP and normal CR LDP processing takes place.
Notification Message Procedures Subsequent messaging Admin Status messaging may be performed by Notification Messages.
The ingress may begin the propagation of a Notification Message with an Admin Status TLV.
Each subsequent node propagates the Notification with the Admin Status TLV from the ingress to the egress and then the egress node returns the Notification messages back Upstream carrying the Admin Status TLV.
Intermediate and egress nodes may trigger the setting of administrative status via the use of Notification messages.
To accomplish this, an intermediate or egress node generates a Notification message with the corresponding upstream notify session information.
The Admin Status TLV MUST be included in the session information, with the appropriate bit or bits set.
The Reflect (R) bit MUST NOT be set.
An ingress or egress node receiving a Notification message containing an Admin Status TLV with the Delete (D) bit set, SHOULD initiate the deletion procedure described in the previous section.
Some special processing is required in order to cover the case of nodes that do not support the Admin Status TLV and other error conditions.
Specifically, a node that sends a Notification message containing an Admin Status TLV with the Down (D) bit set MUST verify that it receives a corresponding LABEL RELEASE message within a configurable period of time.
By default this period of time SHOULD be 30 seconds.
If the node does not receive such a LABEL RELEASE message, it SHOULD send a Label Release message downstream and a LABEL WITHDRAW message upstream.
This section provides the protocol specific formats and procedures to required support a control channel not being in band with a data channel.
The choice of the data interface to use is always made by the sender of the REQUEST message.
The choice of the data interface is indicated by the sender of the REQUEST message by including the data channel's interface identifier in the message using a new Interface TLV type.
For bidirectional LSPs, the sender chooses the data interface in each direction.
In all cases but bundling, the upstream interface is implied by the downstream interface.
For bundling, the REQUEST sender explicitly identifies the component interface used in each direction.
Interface ID TLVS see [RFC3471]
See [RFC3471] for a description of parameters.
See [RFC3212] for a description of signaling address.
See [RFC3471] for a description of parameters and encoding of TLVs.
IF ID TLV is used on links where there is not a one to one association of a control channel to a data channel, see [RFC3471].
The LDP session uses the IF ID TLV to identify the data channel(s) associated with the LSP.
For a unidirectional LSP, a downstream data channel MUST be indicated.
For bidirectional LSPs, a common downstream and upstream data channel is normally indicated.
In the special case where a bidirectional LSP that traverses a bundled link, it is possible to specify a downstream data channel that differs from the upstream data channel.
Data channels are specified from the viewpoint of the sender of a REQUEST message.
The IF ID TLV SHOULD NOT be used when no TLVs are needed.
A node receiving one or more IF ID TLVs in a REQUEST message saves their values and returns them in the subsequent MAPPING message sent to the node that originated the TLVs.
Note, the node originating an IF ID TLV MUST ensure that the selected outgoing interface, as specified in the IF ID TLV, is consistent with an ERO.
A node that receives an IF ID TLV SHOULD check whether the information carried in this TLV is consistent with the information carried in a received ERO, and if not it MUST send a LABEL ABORT Message with the error code "Routing Error" and error value of "Bad Explicit Routing TLV Error" toward the sender.
This check CANNOT be performed when the initial ERO subobject is not the incoming interface.
There are cases where it is useful to indicate a specific interface associated with an error.
the IF ID Status TLV are defined.
The format of the IPv4 IF ID Status TLV is:
See [RFC3036] for a description of status code value fields.
See [RFC3471] for a description of parameters and encoding of TLVs.
Procedures Nodes wishing to indicate that an error is related to a specific interface SHOULD use the appropriate IF ID Status TLV in the corresponding LABEL WITHDRAW or LABEL RELEASE message.
IF ID Status TLV SHOULD be generated and processed as any other Status TLV, see [RFC3036].
In optical transport networks, failures in the out of fiber signaling communication or optical control plane should not have service impact on the existing optical connections.
Under such circumstances, a mechanism MUST exist to detect a signaling communication failure and a recovery procedure SHALL guarantee connection integrity at both ends of the signaling channel.
The LDP Fault tolerant document [LDP FT] specifies the procedures for recovering LDP and CR LDP sessions under failure.
Please refer to his document for procedures on recovering optical connections.
Currently the Fault tolerant document covers many of the common failure modes for a separated control and data plane.
This document introduces no new security considerations to [RFC3212].
This document uses the LDP [RFC3036] name spaces, see http://www.iana.org/assignments/ldp namespaces, which lists the assignments for the following TLVs: Generalized Label Request (TLV 0x0824)
Acceptable Label Set (TLV 0x082a)
IPV4 Interface ID (TLV 0x082d)
IPV6 Interface ID (TLV 0x082e) IPv4
IF ID Status (TLV 0x082f) IPv6
IF ID Status (TLV 0x0830) Protection (TLV 0x0835) 15.
Contributors Peter Ashwood Smith Nortel Networks Corp. P.O. Box 3511 Station C, Ottawa, ON
1 613 763 4534 EMail:
Ayan Banerjee Calient Networks 5853
Rue Ferrari San Jose, CA 95138
1 408 972 3645 EMail:  abanerjee@calient.net
Lou Berger Movaz Networks, Inc. 7926 Jones Branch Drive Suite 615 McLean VA,
703 847 1801 EMail:  lberger@movaz.com
networking.com Yanhe Fan Axiowave Networks, Inc. 200 Nickerson Road Marlborough, MA 01752
1 774 348 4627 EMail:
Don Fedyk Nortel Networks Corp. 600
Technology Park Billerica  MA 01821
Jonathan P. Lang EMail:  jplang@ieee.org
Eric Mannie Independent Consultant 2 Avenue de la Folle Chanson 1050
Brussels Belgium EMail:  eric mannie@hotmail.com
Bala Rajagopalan Tellium, Inc. 2 Crescent Place P.O. Box 901 Oceanport, NJ 07757
1 732 923 9804 EMail:  braja@tellium.com Debanjan Saha EMail:  debanjan@acm.org
Inc. 1600 Villa Street, Unit 352 Mountain View, CA 94041 1174
386 6723 EMail:  v.sharma@ieee.org George Swallow Cisco Systems,
Inc. 250 Apollo Drive Chelmsford
1 978 244 8143 EMail:  swallow@cisco.com Z.
Editors' Addresses Peter Ashwood Smith Nortel Networks Corp. P.O. Box 3511 Station C, Ottawa, ON
1 613 763 4534 EMail:
Lou Berger Movaz Networks, Inc. 7926 Jones Branch Drive Suite 615 McLean VA,
