Abstract This document allocates the fixed pseudowire identifier and other fixed protocol values for protocols that have been defined in the Pseudo Wire Edge to Edge (PWE3) working group.
Detailed IANA allocation instructions are also included in this document.
Most of the new IANA registries and respective IANA allocation processes for protocols defined in the PWE3 IETF working group can be found in this document.
The IANA registries defined here are in general subdivided into three main ranges: a range to be allocated by IETF consensus according to [RFC2434], a range to be allocated by the expert review process according to [RFC2434], and a range to be allocated on a first come, first served basis that is reserved for vendor proprietary allocations.
Note that vendor proprietary types MUST NOT be registered for IETF standards or extensions
thereof, whether they are still in development or already completed.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
IANA Considerations IANA has created several registries as described in the following paragraphs.
Each of these registries contains numeric values used to identify data types.
In each of these registries, the value of 0 is reserved and MUST not be used.
Throughout this document, allocation procedures for several registries call for an expert review process according to [RFC2434].
A brief, clear description of the code point allocation requested should be provided.
The type allocation requested should be appropriate for the particular requested value range in the registry.
The expert reviewing the request MUST approve or disapprove the request within 10 business days from when he or she received the expert review request.
MPLS Pseudowire Type IANA has set up the registry of "MPLS Pseudowire Type".
This type has 15 bit values.
PW Type values 1 through 30 are specified in this document, and PW Type values 31 through 1024 are to be assigned by IANA, using the "Expert Review" policy defined in [RFC2434].
PW Type values 1025 through 4096 and 32767 are to be allocated using the IETF consensus policy defined in [RFC2434].
PW Type values 4097 through 32766 are reserved for vendor proprietary extensions and are to be assigned by IANA, using the "First Come First Served" policy defined in [RFC2434].
A Pseudowire Type description is required for any assignment from this registry.
Additionally, for the vendor  proprietary extensions range, a citation of a person or company name is also required.
A document reference should also be provided.
Structure agnostic E1 over Packet
Interface Parameters Sub TLV Type IANA has to set up the registry of "Pseudowire Interface Parameter Sub TLV types".
This type has 8 bit values.
Sub TLV types 1 through 12 are specified in this document.
Sub TLV types 13 through 64 are to be assigned by IANA, using the "Expert Review" policy defined in [RFC2434].
Sub TLV types 65 through 127 and 255 are to be allocated using the IETF consensus policy defined in [RFC2434].
Sub TLV types values 128 through 254 are reserved for vendor proprietary extensions and are to be assigned by IANA, using the "First Come First Served" policy defined in [RFC2434].
Any assignments requested from this registry require a description of up to 54 characters.
For each allocation, a length field MUST also be specified in one of the following formats:  Text as follows:"up to X", where X is a decimal integer.
Up to 3 different decimal integers.
The text "up to X" means up to and including X. Additionally, for the vendor proprietary extensions range, a citation of a person or company name is also required.
A document reference should also be provided.
Optional Interface Description string [
Note that the Length field is defined as the length of the Sub TLV, including the Sub TLV type and length field itself.
Attachment Individual Identifier Type IANA has to set up the registry of "Attachment Individual Identifier (AII) Type".
This type has 8 bit values.
AII Type value 1 is defined in this document.
AII Type values 2 through 64 are to be assigned by IANA, using the "Expert Review" policy defined in [RFC2434].
AII Type values 65 through 127 and 255 are to be allocated using the IETF consensus policy defined in [RFC2434].
AII types values 128 through 254 are reserved for vendor proprietary extensions and are to be assigned by IANA, using the "First Come First Served" policy defined in [RFC2434].
Any assignments requested from this registry require a description of up to 54 characters.
For each allocation, a length field MUST also be specified as a decimal integer.
Additionally, for the vendor proprietary extensions range, a citation of a person or company name is also required.
A document reference should also be provided.
Type IANA has to set up the registry of "Attachment Group Identifier (AGI) Type".
This type has 8 bit values.
AGI Type value 1 is defined in this document.
AGI Type values 2 through 64 are to be assigned by IANA, using the "Expert Review" policy defined in [RFC2434].
AGI Type values 65 through 127 and 255 are to be allocated using the IETF consensus policy defined in [RFC2434].
AGI type values 128 through 254 are reserved for vendor proprietary extensions and are to be assigned by IANA, using the "First Come First Served" policy defined in [RFC2434].
Any assignments requested from this registry require a description of up to 54 characters.
For each allocation, a length field MUST also be specified as a decimal integer.
Additionally, for the vendor proprietary extensions range, a citation of a person or company name is also required.
A document reference should also be provided.
Initial Attachment Group Identifier (
AGI) Type allocations are specified below:
Pseudowire Status IANA has to set up the registry of "Pseudowire Status Codes".
These are bit strings of length 32.
Status bits 0 through 4 are defined in this document.
Status bits 5 through 31 are to be assigned by IANA using the "Expert Review" policy defined in [RFC2434].
Any requests for allocation from this registry require a description of up to 65 characters.
Initial Pseudowire Status Code value allocations are as follows:
For the definition of the "PW Associated Channel Type" please refer to [RFC4385].
3.6 PW Associated Channel Type
For the definition of the "PW Associated Channel Type", please refer to [RFC4385].
This document specifies only fixed identifiers, and not the protocols used to carry the encapsulated packets across the network.
Each such protocol may have its own set of security issues, but those issues are not affected by the identifiers specified herein.
