Abstract This document describes the OSPFv3 graceful restart.
The OSPFv3 graceful restart is identical to that of OSPFv2 except for the differences described in this document.
These differences include the format of the grace Link State Advertisements (LSAs) and other considerations.
Introduction Graceful OSPF restart [GRACE]
describes a mechanism to restart the control plane of an OSPFv2 [OSPFv2] router that still has its forwarding plane intact with a minimum of disruption to the network.
In general, the methods described in [GRACE] work for OSPFv3
However, OSPFv3 will use a grace LSA with a different format to signal that a router is initiating (or is about to initiate) a graceful restart.
This document describes other OSPFv3 differences as well.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
An OSPFv3 router initiating a graceful restart of its OSPFv3 software originates grace LSAs.
A grace LSA requests that the router's neighbors aid in its graceful restart by continuing to advertise the router as fully adjacent during the specified grace period.
The grace LSA contains the restarting router grace period and the reason code indicating the reason for the graceful restart.
In OSPFv3 (refer to section 2.11 of [OSPFv3]), neighboring routers on any link are always identified by their router IDs.
This contrasts with the OSPFv2 behavior where neighbors on point to point networks and virtual links are identified by their Router IDs, while neighbors on broadcast, Non Broadcast Multi Access (NBMA), and point to  multipoint links are identified by their IPv4 interface addresses.
Consequently, there is no requirement for the router address TLV [GRACE] for OSPFv3 graceful restart.
The TLV formats of the grace LSA described in [GRACE] remain unchanged.
Grace LSA LS Type A grace LSA is defined as an LSA with the LS type equal to 0x000b.
LSA Grace LSA Type and Function Code
The S2 bit and S1 bit are set to 0 to indicate link local flooding scope.
The U bit is set to 0 since it isn't applicable to LSAs with link local flooding scope.
The Link State ID of a grace LSA in OSPFv3 is the Interface ID of the interface originating the LSA.
The following is the list of TLVs that can appear in the body of a grace LSA.
Grace Period (Type 1, Length 4).
The number of seconds that the router's neighbors should continue to advertise the router as fully adjacent, regardless of the state of database synchronization between the router and its neighbors.
This TLV MUST always appear in a grace LSA.
Graceful restart reason (Type 2, Length 1).
the reason for the router restart, as one of the following: 0 (unknown), 1 (software restart), 2 (software reload/upgrade), or 3 (switch to redundant control processor).
This TLV MUST always appear in a grace LSA.
This section describes OSPFv3 unique considerations in addition to those described in [GRACE].
Preservation of LSA ID to Prefix Correspondence
In OSPFv2, there is a direct correspondence between summary and external LSA IDs and the prefixes being advertised.
However, in OSPFv3, the LSA ID for inter area prefix LSAs and external LSAs
is simply an unsigned 32 bit integer.
Hence, to avoid network churn during graceful restart, the restarting router MUST preserve the LSA ID to prefix correspondence across graceful restarts.
Preservation of Interface IDs for Link LSAs, Network LSAs, and Router LSAs
In OSPFv3, the LSA ID for Link LSAs and Network LSAs and link descriptions in Router LSAs map to their corresponding Interface ID.
Changes in the Interface ID during graceful restart will result in a mismatch between the restarting router's pre restart LSAs and its neighbor adjacency state.
These disparities will cause the graceful restart to terminate prematurely.
Synchronizing Interface ID changes between neighbors is possible.
However, placing the burden on the restarting router to preserve Interface IDs across restarts provides for a more robust, more deterministic, and simpler mechanism.
Therefore, the OSPFv3 Interface ID, as described in section 3.1.2 of [OSPFv3], MUST be preserved by the restarting router across restarts.
Many implementations currently use the interface's MIB II IfIndex [MIB INTF] for Interface ID.
The persistence of Interface ID across reboots is described in section 3.1.5 of [MIB PERS].
Security Considerations [OSPFv3 AUTH] relies on manual key distribution which precludes the use of replay protection that utilizes sequence numbers.
The replay of an OSPF Link Update containing a grace LSA would allow an attacker to deceive neighboring routers into believing that a router that has been taken out of service (either intentionally or via a malicious action by the same attacker) is still active and is in the process of graceful restart.
However, this attack is much more difficult than the obvious replay of standard OSPFv3 hello packets to accomplish the same thing by keeping the adjacency up.
Since hello packets are sent more predictably and knowledge of the key is not required, the risk added by OSPFv3 graceful restart is insignificant.
Hence, this document does not raise any new security concerns other than those covered in [OSPFv3], [OSPFv3 AUTH], and [GRACE].
A new LSA function code has been assigned for the OSPFv3 grace LSA.
The assignment of 0x000b has been made in the "OSPFv3 LSA Function Codes" sub registry of the "Open Shortest Path First v3 (OSPFv3) Parameters" registry.
OSPFv3 grace LSA TLVs and sub TLVs use the "OSPFv2 Grace LSA Top Level TLV" IANA sub registry of the "Open Shortest Path First v2 (OSPFv2) Parameters" registry.
