Abstract The Packet switched Streaming Service (PSS) and the Multimedia Broadcast/Multicast Service (MBMS) defined by 3GPP use the Session Description Protocol (SDP) and Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP) with some extensions.
This document provides information about these extensions and registers the RTSP and SDP extensions with IANA.
Introduction 3GPP has specified the Packet switched Streaming Service (PSS)
that uses both RTSP [RFC2326] and SDP [RFC4566].
The service is specified in technical specifications TS 26.233
[PSS 233] and TS 26.234
[PSS 234] in Release 4 and subsequent releases.
The basic service defined in Release 4 is enhanced in Release 5 with capability exchange, and in Release 6 with a number of features, such as adaptation, digital rights management (DRM), progressive download, as well as a streaming server file format defined in [PSS 3GP].
Fast start up and content switching are addressed in Release 7.
3GPP has also specified the Multimedia Broadcast/Multicast Service (MBMS) that uses SDP.
The IP layer protocols used by this service are specified in technical specification TS 26.346 Release 6 [MBMS].
Release 7 extends the MBMS User Service to also work with unicast bearers for interactive and streaming traffic classes.
In the process of defining these services, there has occasionally been a need to extend both SDP and RTSP functionalities.
These extensions have mostly been in the form of SDP attributes and RTSP headers and option tags.
The purpose of this informational document is to register these SDP and RTSP extensions, in order to avoid future conflicts, and also to raise the awareness of their existence within IETF.
In Section 5.4, this document defines three SDP protocol identifiers used in MBMS to enable the usage of block based FEC.
The SDP protocol identifiers require an RFC to be defined and registered.
As this is an RFC from the IETF stream, any semantic change will require a new IETF approved RFC.
The other SDP and RTSP extensions registered by this document are not normatively defined in this document.
Instead, the normative definitions are referenced by the registrations.
3GPP can update the normative definition in future versions of their specifications.
However, to ensure that such a change is visible in the IETF, at minimum, IANA should be notified and the reference to the 3GPP specification updated, and preferably an updated version of this RFC published.
The document begins with two sections presenting the SDP extensions for PSS and MBMS, respectively.
They are followed by a section noting that offer/answer considerations are not applicable here.
The subsequent section presents the extensions of RTSP for PSS.
The IANA registration of SDP attributes and protocol identifiers is given in Section 8.1, and the RTSP headers and option tags in Section 8.2.
For normative descriptions of all SDP and RTSP extensions, we refer to TS 26.234
[PSS 234] and TS 26.346 [MBMS].
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
; see http://www.3gpp.org for more information about this organization.
Multimedia Broadcast/Multicast Service, a service defined by 3GPP that utilizes broadcast or multicast technology in combination with unicast for delivery of a wide range of content to mobile terminals.
Real Time Streaming Protocol; see [RFC2326].
Secure Real time Transport Protocol
Quality of Experience, the quality level of the user experience of a service.
In PSS, this is estimated by a combination of application level metrics.
This document describes 3GPP defined extensions to SDP [RFC4566] and RTSP [RFC2326] and
registers attributes that are normatively defined in 3GPP technical specifications 26.234, 26.244, and 26.346, up to the referenced versions of the respective documents.
The SDP and RTSP extensions have only been defined for usage with the 3GPP service in mind.
The applicability for usage outside of these services has not been considered nor addressed.
Usage of these attributes in other contexts may require further definitions or clarifications.
For example, all SDP attributes lack offer/answer usage rules [RFC3264], which currently makes it impossible to use them with offer/answer.
Please note that change control of these SDP and RTSP extensions
The PSS specification [PSS 234] defines a number of different SDP attributes for different purposes.
They are listed below, grouped by their purpose.
The text is intentionally not specific enough to allow implementation from this document.
The normative definition is in the 3GPP technical specification cited.
The following attributes are used to provide parameters for the video buffer model provided in Annex G and Section 5.3.3.2 of [PSS 234].
The attributes were defined in Release 5 as "X " attributes and, at the time, were not considered for registration.
In hindsight, however, they should not have been "X " attributes, and they should have been registered, as the registration rules of SDP [RFC4566] point out.
Changing their names today is impossible due to the deployed base of millions of mobile handsets supporting PSS, and therefore they are registered in their current form.
All attributes are defined at media level.
The "a X predecbufsize" attribute provides the size of the pre  decoder buffer in bytes.
The "a X initpredecbufperiod" attribute provides the time during which a receiver should initially buffer, in 90 kHz ticks, before starting to consume the data in the buffer in order to ensure that underflow does not occur, assuming correct data delivery.
The "a X initpostdecbufperiod" attribute provides the initial buffering period, in 90 kHz ticks, for the post decoder buffer present in H.263 and MPEG 4 Visual.
The "a X decbyterate" attribute indicates the maximum peak byte  decoding rate used in the verification of the Annex G buffer model expressed in bytes per second.
The "a 3gpp videopostdecbufsize" attribute is used to indicate the value used in determining the H.264 video post decoder buffer size.
Note that complete descriptions of these attributes can be found in Section 5.3.3.2 of [PSS 234].
This media level attribute provides the receiver with the largest picture size that a specific H.263 payload type will carry within the session.
Integrity Protection Configuration Attributes These attributes are all used to configure the integrity protection mechanism defined in Annex K (Sections K.2.2.1, K.2.2.2, and K.2.2.3) of [PSS 234].
The session level attribute "a 3GPP Integrity Key" carries the integrity key used to derive SRTP master keys for integrity protection.
The key is protected in different ways depending on a method identifier.
When using Open Mobile Alliance (OMA)
DRM key management, the key is encrypted using AES [AES] before it is base64 encoded [RFC4648].
The media level attribute "a 3GPP SRTP Config" is used to configure SRTP for integrity protection and contains an integrity nonce, a key salt used in deriving the SRTP master key from the integrity key, and any SRTP configuration parameters, such as the integrity tag length.
The session level attribute "a 3GPP SDP Auth" is used to carry an authentication tag calculated over certain parts of the SDP to prevent manipulation of the security attributes.
The Alternative Attributes Two media level and
one session level attributes are used in a mechanism for providing alternative SDP lines.
One or more SDP lines at media level can be replaced, if desired, by alternatives.
The mechanism is backwards compatible in the way that a receiver that does not support the attributes will get the default configuration.
The different alternatives can be grouped using different attributes that can be specified hierarchically with a top and a lower level.
3GPP Release 6 supports grouping based on bit rate, according to the SDP bandwidth modifiers AS [RFC4566] and TIAS [RFC3890], and language.
The SDP attributes (see Sections 5.3.3.3 and 5.3.3.4 of [PSS 234]) are:  The media level attribute "a alt:<id>:<SDP Line>" carries any SDP line and an alternative identifier.
The media level attribute "a alt default id:<id>" identifies the default configuration to be used in groupings.
The session level attribute "a alt group" is used to group different recommended media alternatives.
This allows providing aggregated properties for the whole group according to the grouping type.
Language and bit rate are two defined grouping types.
The media level SDP attribute "a 3GPP Adaptation Support" (see Section 5.3.3.5 in [PSS 234]) is defined as part of the negotiation procedure of the PSS adaptation mechanism.
The attribute carries a single value indicating how often the RTCP "Next Application Data Unit" (NADU)
APP packet shall be included in sent RTCP compound packets.
The adaptation mechanism allows the client to provide the server with information on the available transmission bit rate and receiver buffer status.
The session  and media level attribute "a 3GPP QoE Metrics" (see Section 5.3.3.6 of [PSS 234]) is used to negotiate the usage of the QoE metrics.
The included parameters indicate which metrics should be used, over which duration there should be measurements, and how often reports should be sent.
The session  and media level attribute "a 3GPP Asset Information" (see Section 5.3.3.7 of [PSS 234]) can exist in multiple instances in a description and describes different types of asset information.
The different asset classes defined in Release 6 are Title, Description, Copyright, Performer, Author, Genre, Rating, Classification, Keywords, Location, Album, and Recording Year.
The different assets are described with a base64 encoded asset box from the 3GP file format [PSS 3GP].
The MBMS specification [MBMS] defines a number of different SDP attributes for different purposes.
They are informatively listed below.
MBMS Bearer Mode Declaration Attribute
The session  and media level attribute "a mbms mode"
(see Section 7.3.2.7 of [MBMS]) is used to describe MBMS broadcast mode media.
The attribute may be used at the session level to set the default for all media and at the media level to specify differences between media.
However, the attribute is never used at the session level when the session includes MBMS multicast mode media, nor at the media level to describe MBMS multicast mode media.
The media level attribute "a mbms flowid" (see Section 8.3.1.9 of [MBMS]) maps one or more FEC source block flow IDs to their corresponding destination IP addresses and UDP port numbers.
It is present in each SDP media block for repair packet streams.
The session  and media level attribute "a mbms repair" (see Section 8.3.1.8 of [MBMS]) is used to provide FEC repair packets with non FEC specific parameters.
For Release 6, one such parameter is defined to specify the required minimum receiver buffer time.
SDP Protocol Identifiers for FEC MBMS defines a mechanism to provide block based FEC for UDP based traffic.
This solution uses the SDP protocol "proto" identifier to identify the media streams that use the FEC shim layer.
The media streams may be either source streams or repair streams.
As required by SDP [RFC4566], these protocol identifiers are normatively defined in this document in accordance with their usage specified by 3GPP.
For FEC protected RTP streams, the following two "proto" identifiers are defined:
They indicate the usage of UDP [RFC0768] with MBMS FEC source packet formats, as defined in Section 8.2.2.4 of [MBMS], that transport RTP packets in accordance with the AVP [RFC3551] or SAVP (Secure RTP)
These protocol identifiers SHALL use the media formats ("fmt")
namespace rules that are used for RTP/ AVP and RTP/SAVP, respectively.
FEC Repair Data Identifier A media stream carrying MBMS FEC repair information over UDP requires its own "proto" identifier.
Protocol identifier "UDP/MBMS REPAIR" identifies the FEC repair packet containing the protocol combination of UDP [RFC0768], FEC repair payload ID, and repair symbols as specified in Section 8.2.2.5 of [MBMS].
The PSS media level buffer attribute "a X initpredecbufperiod" (see Section 4.1) that specifies an initial buffering time is also used for MBMS in Release 7.
It is mainly intended for video streams, but may be used for other media types as well
(see Section 8.3.1.1 of [MBMS]).
The usage of the SDP attributes in an offer/answer [RFC3264] context is not defined.
These SDP attributes are defined for use in a declarative context, and for PSS specifically in the RTSP [RFC2326] context.
The RTSP extensions for PSS consist of a number of new RTSP headers and option tags and a narrowing of URI usage in regards to 3GP files.
The headers and option tags are informatively described here; see [PSS 234] for the normative declaration.
The "3GPP Link Char" header (see Section 5.3.2.1 of [PSS 234]) is used by clients to provide the server with QoS information about the wireless link it is currently using.
The header can be used to provide the server with three different QoS parameters:  Guaranteed Bandwidth  Maximum Bandwidth
The header may be included in RTSP requests using either of the methods SETUP, PLAY, OPTIONS, or SET PARAMETER.
The "3GPP Adaptation" header (see Section 5.3.2.2 of [PSS 234]) is used by the client to provide the server with adaptation related parameters and to indicate support of the adaptation function.
The header carries the resource identification as a URI, the client's buffer size, and the desired target time.
The header may be included in requests using the methods SETUP, PLAY, OPTIONS, and SET PARAMETER.
The response to a request using this method shall include this header.
The "3GPP QoE Metrics" header (see Section 5.3.2.3.1 of [PSS 234]) is used to negotiate the usage of the QoE metrics (see Section 11 of [PSS 234]).
The header may be included in requests and responses using the SETUP, SET PARAMETER, OPTIONS, or PLAY method.
The "3GPP QoE Feedback" header (see Section 5.3.2.3.2 of [PSS 234]) is used to carry QoE metrics from the client to the server when it reports, which happens either during or at the end of the media delivery.
The header may be included in requests using the SET PARAMETER, PAUSE, or TEARDOWN method.
Video Buffer Headers PSS uses several headers to provide the client with the different buffer parameters.
They provide the buffer status at the point of a stream from which a PLAY request plays.
These headers may only be used in PLAY responses.
See Section 5.3.2.4 and Annex G of [PSS 234] for normative definitions.
The three "x " headers were defined in 3GPP Release 5.
When it was realized that they should not have been given "x " names, it was too late to rename them due to deployment.
The RTSP headers are:  x predecbufsize  x initpredecbufperiod
x initpostdecbufperiod  3gpp videopostdecbufsize 7.6.
The integrity protection mechanism defined in PSS Annex K uses the "3GPP Freshness Token" RTSP header (see Section K.2.2.4 of [PSS 234]) to carry a freshness token in DESCRIBE requests.
The PSS specification also defines syntax for referencing tracks within the 3GP file format [PSS 3GP].
The 3GP format is based on the ISO base media file format and is defined in several different profiles, including a streaming server profile, in Release 6.
This syntax is fully contained within the generic URI syntax defined for RTSP URIs.
It is only a syntax restriction that server manufacturers follow to allow clients or proxies to understand what encodes the track number in the URI.
This is provided for information only.
To identify a track within a 3GP file, the last URI segment has to contain a structure that is <alpha string>
(See Section 5.3.3.1 of [PSS 234].)
Fast Start Up and Content Switching Release 7 of PSS defines a number of extensions in terms of headers and option tags (see Section 5.5 of [PSS 234]) for support of fast start up and switching of content for on demand and live applications built on top of PSS.
Clients are enabled to reuse the existing RTSP control session and RTP resources while switching to new content.
The RTSP headers are:  Switch Stream  SDP
The RTSP option tags are:  3gpp pipelined  3gpp switch  3gpp switch req
sdp  3gpp switch stream 8.
SDP Registrations IANA has registered the SDP attributes listed below in the "Session Description Protocol (SDP) Parameters" registry available from http://www.iana.org/. The contact person for this registration is Magnus Westerlund (email: magnus.westerlund@ericsson.com; phone:  46 8 719 0000).
3GPP MBMS FEC protected RTP/AVP over UDP Type of name:
3GPP MBMS defines a mechanism to provide block  based FEC for UDP based traffic.
This solution uses the SDP protocol "proto" identifier to identify the media streams that use the FEC shim layer.
This protocol identifier indicates that the FEC protected data is RTP using the AVP profile.
3GPP MBMS FEC protected RTP/SAVP over UDP Type of name:
3GPP MBMS defines a mechanism to provide block  based FEC for UDP based traffic.
This solution uses the SDP protocol "proto" identifier to identify the media streams that use the FEC shim layer.
This protocol identifier indicates that the FEC protected data is RTP using the Secure AVP profile (SAVP).
3GPP MBMS defines a mechanism to provide block  based FEC for UDP based traffic.
This solution uses the SDP protocol "proto" identifier to identify the media streams that use the FEC shim layer.
This protocol identifier indicates that the FEC repair data is sent over UDP.
Media level only Subject to charset
Post decoder initial buffering period Type of name:
att field Type of attribute:
Media level only Subject to charset
Media level only Subject to charset
Media level only Subject to charset
Media level only Subject to charset
Media level only Subject to charset
3GPP Adaptation Support Long form:
Media level only Subject to charset
3GPP QoE Metrics Long form:
RTSP Registrations IANA has registered the RTSP headers listed below in the RTSP/1.0 Headers table of the "Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP)/1.0 Parameters" registry available from http://www.iana.org/. Note: This registry requires a Standards document, preferably an IETF RFC.
The document that defines the registered headers below is a technical standards document from 3GPP, although the request for registration is submitted using this document to achieve further information spreading within IETF.
The contact person for this registration is Magnus Westerlund (email: magnus.westerlund@ericsson.com; phone:  46 8 719 0000).
See Section K.2 of 3GPP TS
Section K.2.2.4 of 3GPP TS
See Section 5.3.2.1 of 3GPP TS
Section 5.3.2.1 of 3GPP TS
See Section 5.3.2.2 of 3GPP TS
See Section 5.3.2.3.1 of 3GPP TS
See Section 5.3.2.3.2 of 3GPP TS
Section 5.3.2.3.2 of 3GPP TS
See Section 5.5.4.2 of 3GPP TS
See Section 5.5.3 of 3GPP TS
Section 5.3.2.4 of 3GPP TS
Section 5.3.2.4 of 3GPP TS
Section 5.3.2.4 of 3GPP TS
See Section 5.5.2.2.2 of 3GPP TS
Reference IANA has registered the RTSP Option tags (option tags) listed below in the RTSP/1.0 Option Tags table of the "Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP)/1.0 Parameters" registry available from http://www.iana.org/. Option tag:
Section 5.5.3 of 3GPP TS
Section 5.5.4.2 of 3GPP TS
Section 5.5.4.5 of 3GPP TS
Security Considerations SDP attributes are subject to modification by an attacker unless they are integrity protected and authenticated.
The security considerations of the SDP specification [RFC4566] should be reviewed in this regard.
The registered SDP attributes are vulnerable to modification attacks or removal, which may result in problems of a serious nature, including failure to use service and reduced quality.
The registered RTSP headers are also vulnerable to insertion, deletion, or modification attacks similar to SDP attributes.
Also in this case, attacks can result in failure of the service or reduced quality of streaming content.
The three SDP protocol identifiers do not by themselves introduce any additional security threats that don't exist for other protocol identifiers in SDP.
The media stream and the used protocols identified and configured by the SDP protocol identifier may, however, contain security issues by themselves.
