Abstract This document provides instructions to IANA for the creation of a new codepoint registry for the flags field in the Session Attribute object of the Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic Engineering (RSVP TE) signaling messages used in Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) signaling.
The Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) [RFC2205] has been extended as RSVP for Traffic Engineering (RSVP TE) for use in Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) signaling [RFC3209] and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS)
[RFC3209] introduced a new signaling object, the Session Attribute object, that is carried on the RSVP Path message.
The Session Attribute object contains an eight bit field of flags.
The original specification of RSVP TE assigned uses to three of these bit flags.
Subsequent MPLS and GMPLS RFCs have assigned further flags.
There is a need for a codepoint registry to track the use of the bit flags in this field, to ensure that bits are not assigned more than once, and to define the procedures by which such bits may be assigned.
This document lists the current bit usage and provides information for IANA to create a new registry.
This document does not define the uses of specific bits   definitive procedures for the use of the bits can be found in the referenced RFCs. 2.
[RFC3209] defines the use of three bits as follows:
Local protection desired 0x02  Label recording desired 0x04
[RFC4090] defines the use of two bits as follows:
0x08  Bandwidth protection desired 0x10
[RFC4736] defines the use of one bit as follows:
Path re evaluation request 3.
This informational document exists purely to create an IANA registry.
Such registries help to protect the IETF process against denial of  service attacks.
Otherwise there are no security considerations for this document.
IANA Considerations IANA has created a new codepoint registry as follows.
The new registry has been placed under the "RSVP TE Parameters" branch of the tree.
The new registry has been termed "Session Attribute Object Flags."
Flags from this registry may only be assigned by IETF consensus [RFC2434].
The registry references the flags already defined as described in Section 2 of this document.
