The Profile URI Registry Abstract
This document defines a registry for profile URIs to be used in specifications standardizing profiles.
Introduction Profiles, as defined by [RFC6906], can be used to signal support for additional semantics, such as constraints, conventions, extensions, or any other aspects that do not alter the basic media type semantics.
Profiles are identified by a URI and can thus be created without central coordination.
Similar to media types and link relation types, it is, in some cases, beneficial to centrally manage profile URIs to ensure interoperability and decrease the coupling between clients and servers.
This allows the independent evolution of clients and servers as both are coupled to these central contracts instead of being coupled to each other.
Therefore, this document establishes an IANA registry for profile URIs.
All elements in this registry require a URI in order to be registered.
The meaning of the profile URI should be documented in a permanent and readily available public specification in sufficient detail so that interoperability between independent implementations is possible (see the registration template in Section 4).
An example registration request can be found in Section 3.
The following is an example registration request for the profile URI http://example.com/profiles/example.
This is a request to IANA to please register the profile URI "http://example.com/profiles/example" in the "Profile URIs" registry according [RFC7284].
My Profile  Description: An exemplary profile URI registration.
This document establishes the "Profile URIs" registry.
The registration procedure for new entries requires a request in the form of the following template and is "First Come
Instructions for a registrant to request the registration of a profile URI are in Section 2.
The underlying registry data (e.g., the XML file) must include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions [TRUST].
The registration template is:  Profile URI:
The URI that identifies the registered profile.
The name by which the profile being registered is generally known.
A relatively short description of the profile.
For simple profiles, this might be all the documentation that is required and there might be no reference document.
In those cases, be sure this description adequately documents the profile and is suitable for interoperable implementation.
Reference to the document that specifies the URI, preferably including a URI that can be used to retrieve a copy of the document.
An indication of the relevant sections may also be included.
This is recommended but can be left blank if the "Description" field provides sufficient documentation.
The "Profile URIs" registry's initial contents are:  Profile URI:
Description: A profile to be used in examples, in accordance with [RFC6963].
Dublin Core HTML metadata profile
A set of conventions by which a Dublin Core metadata description set can be can be represented within an (X)HTML web page using (X)HTML elements and attributes.
: A profile URI to request or signal expanded JSON LD document form.
[JSON LD]  Profile URI: http://www.w3.org/ns/json ld#compacted  Common Name:
Compacted JSON LD  Description: A profile URI to request or signal compacted JSON LD document form.
Flattened JSON LD  Description: A profile URI to request or signal flattened JSON LD document form.
There are no additional security considerations beyond those already inherent to using URIs.
Security considerations for URIs in general can be found in [RFC3986].
