Abstract This document defines a YANG data model with the "factory reset" RPC to allow clients to reset a server back to its factory default condition.
It also defines an optional "factory default" datastore to allow clients to read the factory default configuration for the device.
The YANG data model in this document conforms to the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA) defined in RFC 8342.
This document defines a YANG data model and associated mechanism to reset a server to its factory default contents.
This mechanism may be used, for example, when the existing configuration has major errors and so restarting the configuration process from scratch is the best option.
A "factory reset" remote procedure call (RPC) is defined within the YANG data model.
When resetting a device, all previous configuration settings will be lost and replaced by the factory default contents.
In addition, an optional "factory default" read only datastore is defined within the YANG data model.
This datastore contains the data to replace the contents of implemented read write conventional configuration datastores at reset and can also be used in the <get data> operation.
The YANG data model in this document conforms to the Network Management Datastore Architecture defined in [RFC8342].
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
operational state datastore    conventional configuration datastore    datastore schema    RPC operation
This document defines the following term: "factory default" datastore:
A read only configuration datastore holding a preset initial configuration that is used to initialize the configuration of a server.
This datastore is referred to as "<factory default>".
This document introduces a new "factory reset" RPC.
conventional read write configuration datastores (i.e., <running>, <startup>, and <candidate>) are reset to the contents of <factory default
Read only datastores receive their contents from other datastores (e.g.,
<intended> gets its contents from <running>).
All data in any dynamic configuration datastores MUST be discarded.
The contents of the <operational> datastore MUST reflect the operational state of the device after applying the factory default configuration.
In addition, the "factory reset" RPC MUST restore nonvolatile storage to factory condition.
Depending on the system, this may entail deleting dynamically generated files, such as those containing keys (e.g., /etc/ssl/private), certificates (e.g., /etc/ssl), logs (e.g., /var/log), and temporary files (e.g., /tmp/ ).
Any other cryptographic keys that are part of the factory installed image will be retained (such as an Initial Device Identifier (IDevID) certificate [BRSKI]).
When this process includes security sensitive data such as cryptographic keys or passwords, it is RECOMMENDED to perform the deletion in as thorough a manner as possible (e.g., overwriting the physical storage medium with zeros and/or random bits for repurposing or end of life (EOL) disposal) to reduce the risk of the sensitive material being recoverable.
The "factory reset" RPC MAY also be used to trigger some other resetting tasks such as restarting the node or some of the software processes.
Note that operators should be aware that since all read write datastores are immediately reset to factory default, the device may become unreachable as a host on the network.
It is important to understand how a given vendor's device will behave after the RPC is executed.
Implementors SHOULD reboot the device and get it properly configured or otherwise restart processes needed to bootstrap it.
"Factory Default" Datastore Following the guidelines for defining datastores in Appendix A of [RFC8342], this document introduces a new optional datastore resource named "factory default" that represents a preset initial configuration that can be used to initialize the configuration of a server.
A device MAY implement the "factory reset" RPC without implementing the "factory default" datastore, which would only eliminate the ability to programmatically determine the factory default configuration.
The "factory default" datastore schema MUST be either (1)
the same as the conventional configuration datastores or (2)
a subset of the datastore schema for the conventional configuration datastores.
YANG nodes:  All "config true" data nodes.
The contents of the datastore is set by the server in an implementation dependent manner.
The contents cannot be changed by management operations via the Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF), RESTCONF, the CLI, etc., unless specialized, dedicated operations are provided.
The datastore can be read using the standard NETCONF/RESTCONF protocol operations.
The "factory reset" operation copies
the factory default contents to <running
The contents of these datastores is then propagated automatically to any other read only datastores, e.g., <intended> and <operational
This document does not define a new origin identity, as it does not interact with the <operational> datastore.
Protocols:  RESTCONF, NETCONF, and other management protocols.
Defining YANG module:  "ietf factory default".
The contents of <factory default> are defined by the device vendor and MUST persist across device restarts.
If supported, the "factory  default" datastore MUST be included in the list of datastores in the YANG library [RFC8525].
This module uses the "datastore" identity [RFC8342] and the "default deny all" extension statement from [RFC8341].
<CODE BEGINS> file "ietf factory default@2020 08 31.yang" module ietf factory default { yang version 1.1; namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:
Ye Niu <mailto:niuye@huawei.com>"; description "This module provides functionality to reset a server to its factory default configuration and, when supported, to discover the factory default configuration contents independently of resetting the server.
Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of the code.
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/license info).
This version of this YANG module is part of RFC 8808; see the RFC itself for full legal notices."; revision 2020 08 31 { description "Initial revision."
"Indicates that the factory default configuration is available as a datastore."
; } rpc factory reset { nacm:default deny all; description "The server resets all datastores to their factory default contents and any nonvolatile storage back to factory condition, deleting all dynamically generated files, including those containing keys, certificates, logs, and other temporary files.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the following URI in the "ns" subregistry within the "IETF XML Registry" [RFC3688]:
ietf factory default Registrant Contact:  The IESG.
N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
IANA has registered the following YANG module in the "YANG Module Names" subregistry [RFC6020] within the "YANG Parameters" registry:
The YANG module specified in this document defines a schema for data that is designed to be accessed via network management protocols such as NETCONF [RFC6241] or RESTCONF [RFC8040].
The lowest NETCONF layer is the secure transport layer, and the mandatory to implement secure transport is Secure Shell (SSH) [RFC6242].
The lowest RESTCONF layer is HTTPS, and the mandatory to implement secure transport is TLS [RFC8446].
The Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM)
[RFC8341] provides the means to restrict access for particular NETCONF or RESTCONF users to a preconfigured subset of all available NETCONF or RESTCONF protocol operations and content.
Access to the "factory reset" RPC operation and factory default values of all configuration data nodes within the "factory default" datastore is considered sensitive and therefore has been restricted by using the "default deny all" access control statement defined in [RFC8341].
The "factory reset" RPC can prevent any further management of the device when the server is reset back to its factory default condition, e.g., the session and client configurations are included in the factory default contents or treated as dynamic files in nonvolatile storage and overwritten by the "factory reset" RPC.
The operational disruption caused by setting the configuration to factory default contents or the lack of appropriate security control on the factory default configuration varies greatly, depending on the implementation and current configuration.
The nonvolatile storage is expected to be wiped clean and reset back to the factory default state, but there is no guarantee that the data is wiped clean according to any particular data cleansing standard, and the owner of the device MUST NOT rely on any sensitive data (e.g., private keys) being forensically unrecoverable from the device's nonvolatile storage after a "factory reset" RPC has been invoked.
Contributors Rohit R Ranade Huawei Email:
