Abstract This document describes a data model for the Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP).
Both versions 2 and 3 of VRRP are covered.
This document introduces a YANG data model [RFC6020] [RFC7950] for the Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)
VRRP provides higher resiliency by specifying an election protocol that dynamically assigns responsibility for a virtual router to one of the VRRP routers on a LAN.
The YANG module specified in this document supports both versions 2 and 3 of VRRP.
VRRP version 2 (defined in [RFC3768]) supports IPv4.
VRRP version 3 (defined in [RFC5798]) supports both IPv4 and IPv6.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
The following terms are defined in [RFC7950] and are not redefined here:  augment  data model  data node 1.2.
Tree Diagrams A simplified graphical representation of the data model is used in this document.
The meaning of the symbols in these diagrams is defined in [RFC8340].
Prefixes in Data Node Names
In this document, names of data nodes, actions, and other data model objects are often used without a prefix, as long as it is clear from the context in which YANG module each name is defined.
Otherwise, names are prefixed using the standard prefix associated with the corresponding YANG module, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Prefixes and Corresponding YANG
Design of the Data Model 2.1.
The model covers VRRP version 2 [RFC3768] and VRRP version 3 [RFC5798].
The model is designed to be implemented on a device where VRRP version 2 or 3 is implemented.
With the help of a proper management protocol, the defined model can be used to:  Configure VRRP version 2 or 3.
Manage the protocol operational behavior.
Retrieve the protocol operational status.
Relationships with the Interface Model and IP Model
This model augments the interface data model "ietf interfaces" [RFC8343] and the IP management model "ietf ip" [RFC8344].
The augmentation relationships are shown as follows:
In the above figure, a tree node without a prefix is from the model "ietf interfaces".
A tree node with prefix "ip:" is from the model "ietf ip".
A tree node with prefix
"vrrp:" is from the VRRP model specified in this document.
The "vrrp" container contains a list of vrrp instance nodes, which are instantiated under an interface for a specified address family (IPv4 or IPv6).
Each vrrp instance node represents a VRRP router state machine, as described in Section 6.4 of [RFC5798], providing the configuration and state information for the election process of a virtual router.
The IP addresses on the augmented interface are the real addresses through which the VRRP router operates.
The IPv4 or IPv6 address or addresses associated with a virtual router (described in Section 1 of [RFC5798]) are modeled as a list of IPv4 or IPv6 addresses under the vrrp instance.
The model structure for the protocol configuration is as shown below:
ipv4:  rw vrrp  rw vrrp instance
rw virtual ipv4 addresses  rw virtual ipv4 address
[ipv4 address]  rw ipv4 address    inet:
ipv6:  rw vrrp  rw vrrp instance
rw virtual ipv6 addresses  rw virtual ipv6 address
[ipv6 address]  rw ipv6 address    inet:
The model allows the following protocol entities to be configured:  VRRP instance (version 2 or 3), representing a VRRP router.
Virtual IPv4 or IPv6 address associated with a virtual router.
Tracking interface, to detect interface connectivity failures.
Tracking network, to detect network connectivity failures.
The model structure for the protocol states is as shown below: module: ietf vrrp
global operational states  ro virtual routers?
yang:date and time  ro checksum errors?
ipv4:  rw vrrp  rw vrrp instance
yang:date and time  ro master down
identityref  ro new master reason?
yang:date and time  ro master transitions?
ro priority zero pkts sent?
counter64  ro invalid type pkts rcvd?
counter64  ro address list errors?
ipv6:  rw vrrp  rw vrrp instance
yang:date and time  ro master down
identityref  ro new master reason?
yang:date and time  ro master transitions?
ro priority zero pkts sent?
counter64  ro invalid type pkts rcvd?
counter64  ro address list errors?
This model conforms to the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA) [RFC8342].
The operational state data is combined with the associated configuration data in the same hierarchy [YANG Guidelines].
When protocol states are retrieved from the NMDA operational state datastore, the returned states cover all "config true" (rw) and "config false
" (ro) nodes defined in the schema.
The model allows the retrieval of protocol states at the following levels:  VRRP instance (version 2 or 3), representing a VRRP router.
Virtual IPv4 or IPv6 address associated with a virtual router.
Tracking interface, to detect interface connectivity failures.
Tracking network, to detect network connectivity failures.
Global states and statistics summarizing all instances.
This model defines the following VRRP specific notifications:
notifications:  n vrrp new master event
ro virtual router error reason    identityref
Each notification type is used to indicate a type of VRRP state change or error occurrence: vrrp new master event VRRP new master event, indicating that a new master has been elected.
vrrp protocol error event VRRP protocol error event for a message that fails to reach a VRRP instance to be processed.
vrrp virtual router error event VRRP virtual router error event for a message processed on a VRRP instance.
In addition to the notifications specified above, the mechanisms defined in [Subscribed Notifications] and [YANG Push] can be used for other general notifications.
These mechanisms currently allow the user to:  Subscribe notifications on a per client basis.
Specify subtree filters or XML Path Language (XPath) filters so that only contents of interest will be sent.
Specify either periodic or on demand notifications.
The VRRP YANG data model defined in this document has the following tree structure: module: ietf vrrp
yang:date and time  ro checksum errors?
ipv4:  rw vrrp  rw vrrp instance
boolean  rw (advertise interval choice)?
yang:date and time  ro master down
identityref  ro new master reason?
yang:date and time  ro master transitions?
ro priority zero pkts sent?
counter64  ro invalid type pkts rcvd?
counter64  ro address list errors?
ipv6:  rw vrrp  rw vrrp instance
boolean  rw advertise interval centi sec?
yang:date and time  ro master down
identityref  ro new master reason?
yang:date and time  ro master transitions?
ro priority zero pkts sent?
counter64  ro invalid type pkts rcvd?
counter64  ro address list errors?
yang:counter64 notifications:  n vrrp new master event
ro virtual router error reason
This module references [RFC2787], [RFC3768], [RFC5798], and [RFC6527].
" module ietf vrrp { yang version 1.1; namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:
} organization "IETF Routing Area Working Group (RTGWG)"; contact
; description "This YANG module defines a model for managing Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP) versions 2 and 3.
IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of the code.
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/license info).
This version of this YANG module is part of RFC 8347; see the RFC itself for full legal notices."; revision 2018 03 13 { description "Initial revision."
A YANG Data Model for the Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)
RFC 2787: Definitions of Managed Objects for the Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol RFC 3768: Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)
RFC 5798: Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)
/ identity vrrp event type { description
"Indicates the type of a VRRP protocol event."
; } identity vrrp event none { base vrrp event type; description "Indicates a non meaningful event."
; } identity vrrp event startup { base vrrp event type; description "Indicates that a VRRP router has initiated the protocol."
; } identity vrrp event shutdown { base vrrp event type; description "Indicates that a VRRP router has closed down the protocol."
; } identity vrrp event higher priority backup { base vrrp event type; description "Indicates that a backup router has a higher priority than the current master."
; } identity vrrp event master timeout { base vrrp event type; description "Indicates that the current master has not sent an advertisement within the limit of master down interval."
; } identity vrrp event no primary ip address { base vrrp event type; description "Indicates that the primary IP address on the VRRP enabled interface has become unavailable."
; } identity vrrp event primary ip address { base vrrp event type; description
"Indicates that the primary IP address on the VRRP enabled interface has become available."
; } identity vrrp event no virtual ip addresses { base vrrp event type; description "Indicates that there are no virtual IP addresses on the virtual router."
; } identity vrrp event virtual ip addresses { base vrrp event type; description "Indicates that there are virtual IP addresses on the virtual router."
; } identity vrrp event preempt hold timeout { base vrrp event type; description "Indicates that the configured preemption hold time has passed."
; } identity vrrp event lower priority master { base vrrp event type; description "Indicates that there is a lower priority VRRP master."
/ identity vrrp error global { description "Indicates the type of a VRRP error that occurred for a packet before it reaches a VRRP router."
; } identity checksum error { base vrrp error global; description "A packet has been received with an invalid VRRP checksum value."
/ identity vrrp error virtual router { description "Indicates the type of a VRRP error that occurred after a packet reaches a VRRP router."
; } identity address list error { base vrrp error virtual router; description "A packet has been received with an address list that does not match the locally configured address list for the virtual router."
; } identity interval error { base vrrp error virtual router; description "A packet has been received with an advertisement interval different than the interval configured for the local virtual router."
; } identity backup { base vrrp state type; description "Indicates that the virtual router is monitoring the availability of the master router."
/ identity vrrp version { description "The version of VRRP."
the VRRP instance changes state (from 'up' to 'down' or 'down' to 'up')."
; } container preempt { description "Enables a higher priority VRRP backup router to preempt a lower priority VRRP master."
Deployments that rely on, for example, pinging the address owner's IPvX address may wish to configure accept mode to 'true'.
Note: IPv6 Neighbor Solicitations and Neighbor Advertisements MUST NOT be dropped when accept mode is 'false'.
ipv4 attributes { description "Group of VRRP attributes for IPv4."; uses vrrp common attributes; choice advertise interval choice { description "The options for the advertisement interval at which VRRPv2 or VRRPv3 advertisements are sent from the specified interface."
advertise interval choice container track { description "
Enables the specified VRRP instance to track interfaces or networks."
; container interfaces { description "Enables the specified VRRPv2 or VRRPv3 instance to track interfaces.
Interface tracking prevents traffic loss by detecting the availability of interfaces.
The operational states of other interfaces are associated with the priority of a VRRP router.
When a tracked interface becomes unavailable (or 'operational down'), the priority of the VRRP router decrements.
When an unavailable interface becomes available again, the priority of the VRRP router is incremented by the same amount."; list interface { key "interface"; description "Interface to track."; leaf interface { type if:interface ref;
; description "Specifies how much to decrement the priority of the VRRP instance if the interface goes down."
interfaces container networks { description "Enables the VRRPv2 or VRRPv3 router instance to track the specified networks through their IPv4 network prefixes.
Network tracking prevents traffic loss by detecting network connectivity failure.
The states of connectivity to some networks are associated with the priority of a VRRP router.
When connectivity to a tracked network represented by its prefix is lost, the priority of the VRRP router decrements.
track container virtual ipv4 addresses { description "Configures the virtual IPv4 address for the VRRP interface."
; list virtual ipv4 address { key "ipv4 address"; max elements 16; description "Virtual IPv4 addresses for a single VRRP instance.
For a VRRP owner router, the virtual address must match one of the IPv4 addresses configured on the interface corresponding to the virtual router."; leaf ipv4 address { type inet:ipv4 address; description "An IPv4 address associated with a virtual router."; reference "RFC 5798: Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)
Version 3 for IPv4 and IPv6.
vrrp ipv4 attributes grouping vrrp
ipv6 attributes { description "Group of VRRP attributes for IPv6."
; } container track { description "Enables the specified VRRP instance to track interfaces or networks."; container interfaces { description "Enables the specified VRRPv2 or VRRPv3 instance to track interfaces.
Interface tracking prevents traffic loss by detecting the availability of interfaces.
The operational states of other interfaces are associated with the priority of a VRRP router.
When a tracked interface becomes unavailable (or 'operational down'), the priority of the VRRP router decrements.
When an unavailable interface becomes available again, the priority of the VRRP router is incremented by the same amount."; list interface { key "interface"; description "Interface to track."; leaf interface { type if:interface ref;
; } description "Interface to track."
; description "Specifies how much to decrement the priority of the VRRP instance if the interface goes down."
interfaces container networks { description "Enables the VRRPv2 or VRRPv3 router instance to track the specified networks through their IPv6 network prefixes.
Network tracking prevents traffic loss by detecting network connectivity failure.
The states of connectivity to some networks are associated with the priority of a VRRP router.
When connectivity to a tracked network represented by its prefix is lost, the priority of the VRRP router decrements.
track container virtual ipv6 addresses { description "Configures the virtual IPv6 address for the VRRP interface."; list virtual ipv6 address { key "ipv6 address"; max elements 2; description "Two IPv6 addresses are allowed.
The first address must be a link local address.
The second address can be a link local or global address."; leaf ipv6 address { type inet:ipv6 address; description "An IPv6 address associated with a virtual router."; reference "RFC 5798: Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)
Version 3 for IPv4 and IPv6.
vrrp ipv6 attributes grouping vrrp state attributes { description "Group of VRRP state attributes."
; leaf state { type identityref { base vrrp:vrrp state type; } config false
; } leaf last event { type identityref { base vrrp:vrrp event type; } config false; description "Last reported event."
; } leaf new master reason { type new master reason type; config false; description "Indicates why the virtual router has transitioned to master state."
; } container statistics { config false; description "VRRP statistics."; leaf discontinuity datetime { type yang:date and time; description "The time on the most recent occasion at which any one or more of the VRRP statistics counters suffered a discontinuity.
If no such discontinuities have occurred since the last re initialization of the local management subsystem, then this node contains the time that the local management subsystem re initialized itself."
If no such discontinuities have occurred since the last re initialization of the local management subsystem, then this node contains the time that the local management subsystem re initialized itself."
; } leaf checksum errors { type yang:counter64; description "The total number of VRRP packets received with an invalid VRRP checksum value."; reference "RFC 5798: Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)
Version 3 for IPv4 and IPv6.
Version 3 for IPv4 and IPv6.
Version 3 for IPv4 and IPv6.
description "The total number of VRRP packets received by the virtual router with IP TTL (IPv4) or Hop Limit (IPv6) not equal to 255."; reference "RFC 5798: Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)
Version 3 for IPv4 and IPv6.
if:interface/ip:ipv6" { description "Augments IPv6 interface."
; container vrrp { description "Configures VRRP version 3 for IPv6."; list vrrp instance { must "derived from or self(version, 'vrrp v3')"
{ description "IPv6 is only supported by version 3."
; } leaf new master reason { type new master reason type; mandatory true
; description "Indicates why the virtual router has transitioned to master state."
; } mandatory true; description "Indicates the reason for the protocol error."
; leaf interface { type if:interface ref;
The information related to a specific IP version is provided by one of the following cases."; case ipv4 { description "IPv4."; container ipv4 { description "Error information for IPv4."; leaf vrid { type leafref { path "/if:interfaces/
} mandatory true; description "Indicates the virtual router on which the event has occurred."
; description "Indicates the reason for the virtual router error."
This document registers the following namespace URI in the "IETF XML Registry" [RFC3688]:
yang:ietf vrrp Registrant Contact: The IESG.
N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
This document registers the following YANG module in the "YANG Module Names" registry [RFC7950]:
The YANG module specified in this document defines a schema for data that is designed to be accessed via network management protocols such as NETCONF [RFC6241] or RESTCONF [RFC8040].
The lowest NETCONF layer is the secure transport layer, and the mandatory to implement secure transport is Secure Shell (SSH) [RFC6242].
The lowest RESTCONF layer is HTTPS, and the mandatory to implement secure transport is TLS [RFC5246].
The NETCONF access control model [RFC8341] provides the means to restrict access for particular NETCONF or RESTCONF users to a preconfigured subset of all available NETCONF or RESTCONF protocol operations and content.
There are a number of data nodes defined in this YANG module that are writable/creatable/deletable (i.e., config true, which is the default).
These data nodes may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
Write operations (e.g., edit config) to these data nodes without proper protection can have a negative effect on network operations.
These are the subtrees and data nodes and their sensitivity/vulnerability:
Unauthorized access to any data node of these subtrees can adversely affect the routing subsystem of both the local device and the network.
This may lead to network malfunctions, delivery of packets to inappropriate destinations, and other problems.
Some of the readable data nodes in this YANG module may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
It is thus important to control
read access (e.g., via get, get config, or notification) to these data nodes.
These are the subtrees and data nodes and their sensitivity/vulnerability:
Unauthorized access to any data node of these subtrees can disclose the operational state information of VRRP on this device.
Appendix A.  Data Tree Example
This section contains an example of an instance data tree in JSON encoding [RFC7951], containing both configuration and state data.
(This example includes "iana if type", which is defined in [RFC7224].)
