Abstract This document defines optional Diameter attributes that can be used to help manage networks that use Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) or Diameter traffic filters.
These new attributes allow for improved data traffic identification, support of ECN, and minimal Diameter filter administration.
RFC 5777 defines a Filter Rule Attribute Value Pair (AVP) that accommodates extensions for classification, conditions, and actions.
It, however, does not support traffic identification for packets using Explicit Congestion Notification as defined in RFC 3168 and does not provide specific actions when the flow(s) described by the Filter Rule are congested.
Further, a Filter Rule can describe multiple flows but not the exact number of flows.
Flow count and other associated data (e.g., packets) are not captured by accounting applications, leaving administrators without useful information regarding the effectiveness or appropriateness of the filter definition.
The optional attributes defined in this document are forward and backwards compatible with RFC 5777.
Introduction Two optional AVPs related to Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) [RFC3168] are specified in this document.
The first AVP provides direct support for filtering
ECN marked traffic [RFC3168] and the second AVP provides the ability to define alternate traffic treatment when congestion is experienced.
This document also defines two optional AVPs, Flow Count and Packet  Count, used for conveying flow information within the Diameter protocol [RFC6733].
These AVPs were found to be useful for a wide range of applications.
The AVPs provide a way to convey information of the group of flows described by the Filter Rule, IPFilterRule, or other Diameter traffic filters.
The semantics and encoding of all AVPs can be found in Section 3.
Such AVPs are, for example, needed by some congestion management functions to determine the number of flows congested or used by administrators to determine the impact of filter definitions.
Additional parameters may be defined in future documents as the need arises.
All parameters are defined as Diameter encoded Attribute Value Pairs (AVPs), which are described using a modified version of the Augmented Backus Naur Form (ABNF), see [RFC6733].
The data types are also taken from [RFC6733].
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119
ECN IP Codepoint, Congestion Treatment, and Filter Attributes 3.1.
The ECN IP Codepoint AVP (AVP Code 628) is of type Enumerated and specifies the ECN codepoint values to match in the IP header.
When this AVP is used for classification in the Filter Rule, it MUST be part of the Classifier Grouped AVP as defined in RFC 5777.
The Congestion Treatment AVP (AVP Code 629) is of type Grouped.
It indicates how to treat traffic IP (5 tuple)
The detection of congestion can be based on the reception of IP packets with the Congestion Experience (CE) codepoint set (see [RFC3168]) or by any other administratively defined criteria.
A Filter Rule may contain a Classifier that describes one or many 5 tuples per RFC 5777.
This treatment applies to all packets associated to all 5 tuples (flows) captured by the Filter Rule.
If the Congestion Treatment AVP is absent, the treatment of the congested traffic is left to the discretion of the node performing quality of service (QoS) treatment.
[ AVP ] Treatment Action, QoS Profile Template, and QoS Parameters are defined in RFC 5777.
The Congestion Treatment AVP is an action and MUST be an attribute of the Filter Rule Grouped AVP as defined in RFC 5777.
The Flow Count AVP (AVP Code 630) is of type Unsigned64.
It indicates the number of protocol specific flows.
The protocol is determined by the filter (e.g., IPFilterRule, Filter Id, etc.).
Packet Count AVP The Packet Count AVP (AVP Code 631) is of type Unsigned64.
It indicates the number of protocol specific packets.
The protocol is determined by the filter (e.g., IPFilterRule, Filter Id, etc.).
AVP Codes IANA allocated AVP codes in the IANA controlled namespace registry specified in Section 11.1.1 of [RFC6733] for the following AVPs that are defined in this document.
The following examples illustrate the use of the AVPs defined in this document.
The Classifier AVP (AVP Code 511) specified in RFC 5777 is a grouped AVP that consists of a set of attributes that specify how to match a packet.
The addition of the ECN IP Codepoint is shown here.
[ ECN IP Codepoint ]
[ Diffserv Code Point ]
[ AVP ] Setting the ECN IP Codepoint value to 'CE' would permit the capture of CE flags in the Flow.
Another Classifier with the ECN IP Codepoint value of 'ECT' could be specified and, when coupled with the Flow Count AVP, reports the number of ECT capable flows.
Diameter Credit Control (CC) with Congestion Information Diameter nodes using Credit Control can use the Congestion Treatment AVP to trigger specific actions when congestion occurs.
This is similar to the Excess Treatment Action.
The ability to detect when congestion occurs is specific to the AVPs in the Filter Rule and Diameter Client and is no different than how 'Excess' can be determined for Excess Treatment.
If conditions associated with Excess Treatment [RFC5777] or Congestion Treatment have occurred, Diameter Clients may autonomously send Credit Control Requests (CCRs) during the Service Delivery session as interim events.
This is shown in Figure 1.
The 'Used Service Units' described in RFC 5777 examples is customarily a Service Units, Time Units, or Byte Count AVP.
This is insufficient to represent network state and does not differentiate between throughput and good put (good or quality throughput) even though the filters may imply good or poor throughput.
Flow Count and Packet Count AVPs defined in this document could be sent with a CCR when the triggering event is related to Congestion  Treatment.
This provides the CC Server with a better view of the type of congested traffic for improved decision making and charging.
Sending such AVPs under any condition permits rudimentary traffic profiling regardless of network conditions.
For instance, low byte counts per packet is indicative of web traffic and high byte counts per packet with a small number of flows may be indicative of video traffic.
Enriched reporting described here provides relief from Deep Packet Inspection load and loss of information as traffic becomes increasingly encrypted.
Some services, e.g., streaming services, limit the number of flows, Flow Count, as opposed to other units, i.e. Byte Count.
In such a case, the Flow Count AVP may be used in place of Service Units.
This document describes an extension of RFC 5777 that introduces a new filter parameter applied to ECN as defined by [RFC3168].
It also defines a new Grouped AVP that expresses what action to take should congestion be detected.
The Grouped AVP reuses attributes defined in RFC 5777.
As these are extensions to RFC 5777, they do not raise new security concerns.
The Flow Count and Packet Count AVPs can be provided in conjunction with customary AVPs, e.g., Bytes, Time, Service units, during accounting activities as described in the base protocol [RFC6733] or other Diameter applications.
These new AVPs provide more information that can be privacy sensitive.
The privacy sensitivity is directly related to traffic captured by filters and associated reports.
Narrow filtering, which creates the highest level of privacy sensitivity, is too resource intensive to be widely applied on large networks.
Paradoxically, improving reporting information lessens the depth of inspection required to characterize traffic for many congestion management activities as noted in Section 5.2.
If an administrator can provide congestion actions without the need to report them to a Diameter application, they should use the Congestion Treatment AVP, which also reduces Diameter traffic during congestion events.
The Security Considerations of the Diameter protocol itself have been discussed in RFC 6733
Use of the AVPs defined in this document MUST take into consideration the security issues and requirements of the Diameter base protocol.
