TELNET OUTPUT FORMFEED DISPOSITION OPTION 1.
Command name and code NAOFFD 13
(Negotiate About Output Formfeed Disposition)
In the following, we are discussing a simplex connection, as described in the NAOL and NAOP Telnet Options specifications.
The data sender requests or agrees to negotiate about output formfeed disposition with the data receiver.
In the case where agreement has been reached and in the absence of further subnegotiations, the data receiver is assumed to be handling output formfeeds.
The data sender refuses to negotiate about output formfeed disposition with the data receiver, or demands a return to the unnegotiated default mode.
IAC WILL NAOFFD The data receiver requests or agrees to negotiate about output formfeed disposition with the sender.
In the case where agreement has been reached and in the absence of further subnegotiations, the data receiver alone is assumed to be handling output formfeeds.
The data receiver refuses to negotiate about output formfeed disposition, or demands a return to the unnegotiated default mode.
The data sender specifies, with the 8 bit value, which party should handle formfeeds and what their disposition should be.
The code for DS is 1.
The data receiver specifies, with the 8 bit value, which party should handle formfeeds and what their disposition should be.
The code for DR is 0.
In the default absence of negotiations concerning which party, data sender or data receiver, is handling output formfeeds, neither party is required to handle formfeeds and neither party is prohibited from handling them; but it is appropriate if at least the data receiver handles formfeed considerations, albeit primitively.
The value is the number of character times to wait or number of NULs to insert in the data stream before sending the next data character.
Note that, due to the assynchrony of the two simplex connections, phase problems can occur with this option.
The guiding rules are that: 1) if neither data receiver nor data sender wants to handle output formfeeds, the data receiver must do it, and 2) if both data receiver and data sender want to handle output formfeeds, the data sender gets to do it.
The reasoning for the former rule is that if neither wants to do it, then the default in the NAOFFD option dominates.
If both want to do it, the sender, who is presumed to have special knowledge about the data, should be allowed to do it, taking into account any suggestions the receiver may make.
Simulation is defined as the replacement of the formfeed character by enough line feeds (only) to advance the paper (or line pointer) to the top of the next page (or to the top of the terminal screen).
Note that delays, controlled by the data sender, must consist of NUL characters inserted immediately after the formfeed character.
This is necessary due to the assynchrony of network transmission.
As with all option negotiations, neither party should suggest a state already in effect except to refuse to negotiate; changes should be acknowledged; and once refused, an option should not be resuggested
