A Universal Host Table ABSTRACT:
The network host  table in use  at MIT and
This host table is superior to the NIC and Tenex host tables in  several ways.
A binary file, compiled from this host table, is also  described.
This file  is used  by  subsystems on  MIT's  ITS and  Stanford's  WAITS timesharing systems for efficiency in host and network lookups.
As with many other  sites on the Arpanet,  we found the NIC's  host table unsuited to our  needs.
Part of the  problem was because the  NIC host table was  often inaccurate  and all  too often  failed to  include several nicknames in common usage in our communities.
In addition,  the those which wanted  to have the  host table mapped  into memory in  some sort of structured binary form for efficient lookups.
Finally, the  NIC host table neglects to include some essential information.
The ITS host  table was  originally designed to  be compiled  along with a network handling program (MIDAS, the PDP 10
assembler used, has a pseudo op to insert a file into an assembly).
In order to make the host table palatable  to  the assembler,  every  comment line  began  with  a semicolon,  and every actual data line  began with the word HOST.
Each program which used  the host  table defined  HOST as  an assembly  macro before inserting the host table into the assembly.
This worked well for a long  while, but as the network grew,  hosts changed their status more frequently and more network programs  required reassembly when the host table  was updated.
If the appropriate  person for a particular subsystem  was not around, it  could be a while  before that subsystem updated its host table.
In the spring of 1977, design started on a binary file which  would be placed on a system directory and which all subsystems which wanted to access host table information would  read in.
The format was  carefully designed to be general  enough to satisfy the  needs of all the  diverse subsystems.
All of  these subsystems required  modification to use  the new format but these modifications turned out to be trivial compared  to the benefits from not having to recompile every subsystem.
Recently, support  for  multiple  networks
has  been  added,  including allowing hosts  to be  on more  than one  network, and  a more  flexible compiler than assembler macros was written (the program which  generates the binary file now does the compiling).
In the descriptions below, angle  brackets and lower case are  used as a meta linguistic device.
It should be noted  that spaces and  tabs are often ignored  and may be  used freely in  the source format,  while commas are always  explicit delimiters.
In  addition, semicolon  always begins a commentary and  everything after the semicolon  on the line  is ignored; however, any text before the semicolon on the line is processed as usual.
The syntax rules should  be obvious by examining the text  of the host  table  in  the  appendix.
Names  are  alphanumeric  strings, consisting of the set (A Z, 0 9, and (i.e., dash)).
Quoting is  used to separate examples from the text and is not part of the example.
The host table consists of commentary and two types of text  lines.
The commentary  lines begin  with a  semicolon and  are ignored  by  the compiler.
They are intended to  provide information for a human  reader or editor of the host table.
The commentary lines may be in mixed case, however the text lines are by  tradition entirely in upper case.
There are two kinds of text lines:  host and network.
Network text lines begin with the word "NET" followed by a space or tab.
These specify a network name  and the network number (as  assigned by Postel)  for that  network.
As there  currently are  no  officially assigned network names, suitable names were assigned more or less  based on the  English names in Postel's  "Assigned Numbers",  RFC 750.
These names may be changed in the  future (however, some software has come  to depend on the names  ARPA, CHAOS, and DIAL  for the ARPANET,  Chaos net, and Dialnet).
The format of a network text line is: NET <name>,<decimal number>
For example, the ARPANET's entry would look something like:
NET ARPA,10 Host text lines begin with the  word "HOST" followed by a space  or tab.
These specify a host name, a host address list, whether this  host is a "user" or a "server", the name of the host's operating system,  the name of the host's  machine type, and a  nick name list.
The  operating system, machine type,  and/or nick name
list may be  omitted, in  which case they default to unknown or null.
The host name is a unique  name string for that host.
For  ARPANET sites, it is the  official name for  that host as  assigned by the  NIC.
For other  networks,  it is  whatever  name is  in  common use  on  that network.
naming  conflicts   on multiple network hosts.
The host address list is either a single host address, or a list of host addresses  in square  brackets  and delimited  by commas.
A  host address consists of a network name,  a space, and the host's address  on that network.
If the network name is not specified, it defaults to ARPA (i.e., "ARPA 0/11" and "0/11" are equivalent).
Different networks parse host addresses in different ways: ARPANET addresses are in BBN style host number slash
IMP number notation, with both numbers being decimal.
Hence  host 2 on IMP 6 is represented as "2/6".
Of course, this format is backwards, but it has become  enough of a network standard  to force its use.
Old style octal addresses  are allowed  (e.g. "206" for "2/6") but are no longer used or supported.
are  a single  octal  number,  e.g. "CHAOS 2026", and specify the host's address on the CHAOS net.
are a  ten digit decimal  number,  and specify the TelCo (phone) number of the host's Dialnet port.
The definition  of  user vs.  server  is generally  taken  to  mean "according to the NIC" for ARPANET hosts.
A server is considered to  be a host for which making a connection to a remote service is a meaningful operation.
For some hosts with limited servers, the definition often is changed  from   the  official   one,  depending   upon  the   individual circumstances.
For  example,  "users"  who  have  an  FTP  server  and
occasionally a TELNET server may be called "servers".
On the other hand a "server" which does not accept MAIL and rejects MAIL in a pathological way (e.g. by hanging) might be labelled a "user".
The name of  the host's operating  system is a  string much as  the host name is, such as  "ITS", "TOPS 20", or "MULTICS".
Some  subsystems use this information to predict  certain behavior of the remote  server.
For example,  a MAIL  user  subsystem knows  that for  operating  system "MULTICS" it has to  log in as user  NETML before attempting to  deliver the mail.
The name of the host's machine type  is a string as well.
For  the convenience of several subsystems, all DEC "PDP n" machines are  entered without the dash, and all PDP 10 like machines (e.g., KL 20, MAXC, etc.) are considered to be PDP 10's, which by the way gets entered as  "PDP10" since that is a single 36 bit  word in 7 bit ASCII.
Like the  operating system name,  several  subsystems use  this  information as  well.
The nick name list is in  square brackets and consists of a  series of names delimited by commas.
There may be any number of nick names.
The format of a host text line is: HOST <name>,<address list>,<status>,<system>,<machine>,<nickname list>
For example, an entry might look something like: HOST MIT AI,[ARPA 2/6,CHAOS 2026],SERVER,ITS,PDP10,[AI,MITAI]
this entry describes a host named "MIT AI" on two networks (ARPANET  and CHAOS net), with ARPANET address "2/6" and CHAOS net address "2026".
It is a server site, running an  operating system called  "ITS" on  "PDP10" hardware.
It has two nicknames, "AI" and "MITAI".
The host table binary file is  a 36 bit data file; consequently  it probably is only of  interest to PDP 10 sites.
The format of the  file is:
The name of this file in SIXBIT.
The name of the source file in SIXBIT.
The version of the source file in SIXBIT  if compiled on an ITS site, otherwise the name of the site in SIXBIT.
The directory name of the source, usually in SIXBIT.
The name of the site in SIXBIT.
The user name who compiled the file, usually in SIXBIT.
Network number assigned by Postel.
Address in file of name of network in ASCIZ.
Address in file of network's  ADDRESS table (zero means no ADDRESS table, i.e. no hosts).
entry word 0   Network address of this entry, including network number.
For ARPANET addresses this is in the format: xxx000,,000000  Network number 000xxx,,xxx000
Each number is right justified.
For CHAOS net addresses it is an octal number.
For Dialnet addresses it is the address in the file  of the TelCo number in ASCIZ.
Address in file of SITE table entry.
Address in file of next ADDRESS table  entry for this site (zero means end of list).
Address in file of official name in ASCIZ.
Address in file of first ADDRESS table entry for this site.
Address in file of  operating system name  in ASCIZ
Address in file of  machine  type  in  ASCIZ
The 400000 bit means a server site.
Address in file of SITE table entry for  this host.
Address in file of host name in ASCIZ.
A host table capable of supporting the full host addressing of  the ARPANET and additional networks has been presented, along with a  binary file format for efficient manipulation of this host table data.
We are  documenting this  format  in order  to  present it  to  the outside world as  a suggested  replacement for the  current host  table.
The advantage of our host table is that it has  already been implemented and is in use at MIT and Stanford.
A Universal Host Table for network names, as there are currently no network names assigned.
So this RFC is also a request for some discussion about getting some  names assigned for the networks for the benefit of host tables.
Anybody who is interested in importing our host table to their  own system should contact  David Moon  (MOON@MIT MC) or  me (MRC@SU AI)  for more information.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Many people have been involved in the design and implementation  of the current host table.
They include,  in no particular order,  Richard Stallman, David Moon, Ken Harrenstien, and Mark Crispin.
I won't bother to list the contributions individually, since it's hard to determine who did what
and that sort of stuff is boring to read anyway.
The host table as of this writing is listed in this appendix.
SAIL's version is kept on HOSTS.TXT[NET,MRC].
;  Modifications should be made to the AI file and a note of ; the change sent to Info Hosts@AI and Info Net@SAIL.
If ; you're going to modify it, you should warn MRC@SAIL and ; SWG@DM, who normally maintain it, to avoid timing errors.
;  If you want to do it the hard way, read those files.
; The network table is in the format of one line entries looking like: ; NET <name>,<network
All fields should be ; in upper case.
A 1] A Universal Host Table
; The host table is in the format of one line entries looking like: ;
All fields should be ; in upper case.
so it fits in one 36 bit word.
