Abstract This MIB module defines textual conventions to represent the commonly used IPv6 Flow Label.
The intent is that these textual conventions (TCs) will be imported and used in MIB modules that would otherwise define their own representations.
Several standards track MIB modules have defined objects to represent an IPv6 Flow Label (sometimes referred to as Flow ID)
[RFC2460] [FLOWLABEL] and IPv6 Flow Label filters.
Unfortunately the result is a set of different definitions for the same piece of management information.
This may lead to confusion and unnecessary complexity.
This document defines a set of textual conventions (TCs) that can and should be (re )used in MIB modules, so that they all represent an IPv6 Flow Label in the same way.
In fact, PIB modules can and should also use these TCs when they need to represent an IPv6 Flow label.
The Internet Standard Management Framework
For a detailed overview of the documents that describe the current Internet Standard Management Framework, please refer to section 7 of RFC 3410 [RFC3410].
Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed the Management Information Base or MIB.
MIB objects are generally accessed through the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP).
Objects in the MIB are defined using the mechanisms defined in the Structure of Management Information (SMI).
This memo specifies a MIB module that is compliant to the SMIv2, which is described in STD 58, RFC 2578 [RFC2578], STD 58
, RFC 2579 [RFC2579] and STD 58, RFC 2580
BEGIN IMPORTS MODULE IDENTITY, mib 2, Integer32
Bert Wijnen (Editor) Lucent Technologies Schagen 33 3461 GL
31 348 407 775 EMail:
Send comments to <mibs@ops.ietf.org>. "
This MIB module provides commonly used textual conventions for IPv6 Flow Labels.
This version of this MIB module is part of RFC 3595, see the RFC itself for full legal notices. "
The flow identifier or Flow Label in an IPv6 packet header that may be used to discriminate traffic flows.
Version 6 (IPv6) specification, section 6.
"The flow identifier or Flow Label in an IPv6 packet header that may be used to discriminate traffic flows.
The value of  1 is used to indicate a wildcard, i.e. any value. "
The MIB module contained in this memo does not define any management objects.
Instead, it defines a set of textual conventions which may be used by other MIB modules to define management objects.
Meaningful security considerations can only be written for MIB modules that define concrete management objects.
This document has therefore no impact on the security of the Internet.
