Abstract This document describes how holes can be specified in geodetic service boundaries.
One means of implementing a search solution in a service database, such as one might provide with a Location to  Service Translation (LoST) server, is described.
The LoST protocol [RFC5222] maps service and locations to destination addresses.
A LoST server does this by provisioning boundary maps or areas against service URNs.
The boundary is a polygon made up of sets of geodetic coordinates specifying an enclosed area.
In some circumstances, an area enclosed by a polygon, also known as an exterior polygon, may contain exception areas, or holes, that for the same service must yield a different destination to that described by the larger area.
This document describes a profile of Geographic Markup Language (GML)
[ISO 19107] polygons that constrains their representation when used for describing service boundaries.
The profile removes a number of permutations that are difficult to process.
This allows for simplified implementations that are not capable of handling all potential variations allowed by GML.
A fully conformant GML implementation must produce polygons that fit this profile to ensure interoperability.
This document describes a profile of GML [ISO 19107] polygons that constrains their representation when used for describing service boundaries.
The working group considered that the types of regions described in this memo could be represented in various ways as polygons without holes, but concluded on the recommendations here to avoid potential problems with the arbitrary division of regions and to align with existing geospatial system practices.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Specifying Holes Holes related to an exterior boundary polygon MUST adhere to the following rules:
Two holes MUST NOT have more than one point of intersection.
If two or more holes overlap or share a common boundary, then these represent a single hole.
The internal elements (holes) should have common boundaries removed and a single hole created irrespective of whether the excluded area is itself made up of multiple service boundaries.
Hole Specification with Boundary Sharing Rule 2:
A polygon MUST describe a contiguous region.
If a hole overlaps with the outer boundary, or it shares part of a side with the outer boundary, then it has an inlet and it MUST be expressed without the hole.
If a hole touches the outer boundary in two places, the region MUST be expressed as two separate polygons.
Hole with Enclosed Polygon (Island) Rule 3:
A hole MUST be formed from a legal linear ring in accordance with [geoshape], except that points are specified in a clockwise direction.
Holes are specified in a clockwise direction so that the upward normal is opposed to the upward normal of the exterior boundary of the polygon.
Note that [geoshape] stipulates that exterior boundaries are specified in counterclockwise order.
There is no restriction on the number of points that are used to express the perimeter of either exterior or interior boundaries.
The GML encoding of a polygon defines a enclosed exterior boundary, with the first and last points of boundary being the same.
Consider the example in Figure 6.
Hexagon and Associated GML Note that polygon vertices in Figure 6 are expressed using <pos> elements for clarity.
The vertices can also be expressed using a <posList> element.
A hole is specified in the polygon by defining an interior boundary.
The points defining the internal boundary define the area represented by the hole in the primary (exterior) polygon.
The shaded area in Figure 7 is represented by the 4 points of the interior boundary specified by (w,z,y,x).
Service Boundary Specification and Selection Algorithm A service boundary is represented by a polygon that may have many vertices.
The enclosed area of the polygon represents the area in which a service, expressed as a service URN, maps to a single URI.
Figure 7 is used to illustrate two service boundaries.
The first service boundary A F shall be referred to as area A, and the second service boundary w z shall be referred to as area w.
Furthermore, area A is directly represented by the GML encoding provided in Figure 7.
Area w is represented as a hole in area A by the interior boundary.
Since area w is also a service boundary, a separate polygon describing this area is also required and is shown in Figure 8 (note the reversal of the vertices).
GML for Area w Service mappings for these boundaries might be provided by a LoST server in the form shown in Figure 9.
2010 12 25T09:44:33Z" lastUpdated "2010 03
08T03:48:22Z" source "authoritative.foo.example" sourceId "7e3f40b098c711dbb606011111111111
urn:service:sos.police</service> <serviceBoundary profile "geodetic 2d"
this is the service boundary hole
> </mapping> <mapping xmlns "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:lost1" expires "2010 12 25T09:44:33Z" lastUpdated "2010 03
08T03:48:22Z" source "authoritative.foo.example" sourceId "7e3f40b098c711dbb606011111111111
"> <displayName xml:lang "en">Inner Area Police</displayName
urn:service:sos.police</service> <serviceBoundary profile "geodetic 2d"
It is considered likely that LoST servers will need to provide responses sufficiently quickly to allow real time queries to be performed as part of an emergency call routing flow.
It is for this reason that databases supporting native geospatial query techniques are desirable and
that service boundary specifications that are easily mapped to internal data structures are preferred.
Using interior boundaries makes support for this operation easy, while allowing an arbitrary number of holes in a service boundary to be specified.
Each polygon is stored in the geospatial database and mapped to a service URN and destination URI.
Many geospatial databases natively support polygons with interior exclusions.
Without native support, interior boundaries can be stored against the polygon and can checked separately.
A location falls within the area described by a polygon if it is within the exterior boundary and not within any interior boundary.
In the above example, if a location falls within the interior boundary, it maps to the "Inner Area Police" service; likewise, if a location falls within the exterior boundary, but not within the interior boundary, it maps to the "Outer Area Police" service.
Security Considerations Constraining the form of a polygon representation as described in this document does not introduce new security considerations.
