Abstract This document lists the various Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
email address formats that are currently in common use and defines several new address formats for special case usage.
Requirements are imposed on the formats of addresses used in VPIM submission mode.
This document lists the various VPIM email address formats that are currently in common use and defines several new address formats for special case usage.
Requirements are imposed on the formats of addresses used in VPIM submission mode [VPIM2] does not place any restrictions on the email address format.
However, it does recommend the use of a numeric LHS since many legacy voice mail systems only use digits to identify mailboxes.
Further, it recommends a structure to handle private, international and extensions.
The private format has become deployed in most existing VPIM v2 systems, further some systems will only accept messages from addresses with a numeric LHS.
[IVM] does not describe addressing at all.
The LHS format is left to the discretion of the mailbox owner.
However, it is useful in some cases (like submission or tunneling) to specify a LHS format.
A format based on GSTN addressing [GSTN] is presented.
This document defines the various recipient (i.e., TO) addresses for VPIM and IVM messages.
Conventions used in this Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
It is defined as "local part" in RFC 2822.
It is defined as "domain" in RFC  2822.
This is defined in section 4.1.1 of [VPIM2] and [VPIMV2R2].
Of the four groups of addresses defined, the mailbox number format is the most commonly used in VPIM v2 systems.
VPIM Addressing VPIM places no restrictions on the form of the Internet address.
VPIM systems must be capable of receiving an arbitrary email address and generating a reply to that address.
No inferences about the structure of the local part (LHS) should be necessary.
Recipients email addresses must be created in a form compatible with the recipients system and consistent with the address entry capabilities of a telephone user interface.
The following sections use formal syntax compliant with RFC 2234, "Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications: ABNF".
A gateway translates between dissimilar environments.
For VPIM, a gateway connects between the VPIM profile of Internet mail and other voice mail networking protocols (including voice call answer and delivery).
These may be proprietary or standard
VPIM gateways typically service multiple voice mail users or, in the case of call answer, service only one.
In the former case, they serve as a classic "mail transfer agent" (MTA) and in the latter as a classic "mail user agent" (UA).
An onramp is a gateway which connects from another voice mail networking protocol to VPIM.
An offramp is a gateway which connects from VPIM to another voice mail networking protocol.
Behavior of onramps and offramps is out of scope for this specification.
This specification describes the VPIM service portion of onramp and offramp addressing.
VPIM Submission LHS Limited capability voice mail machines may send messages by default to an external message submission gateway.
These gateways will convert the unresolved telephone number of the recipient into a legitimate email address.
Messages requiring address resolution must be sent to a submission system which will convert the submitted address into the route able email address.
Additionally, limited capability email systems may send messages to a VPIM onramp system indicated on the RHS.
The LHS would indicate that the message is to be sent as a VPIM message to the telephone number indicated.
In this case, address and message translation is performed by the gateway.
Telephone numbers sent in a VPIM submission mode MUST be sent in one of the following forms.
This is based on the format defined in [GSTN ADDR] and extensions in [GSTN].
The VPIM address For voice messages that are intended to be sent as VPIM messages the service selector element is defined to be: vpim service selector
"VPIM" The resultant vpim address and vpim mbox are formally vpim address
vpim mbox [ pstn recipient ]
[ sub addr spec ext addr spec dl addr spec]
The extension syntax, that is a phone number followed by "/EXT "
defining the extension, would be used where the mailbox does not have a direct dial number associated with it (e.g., typically behind a non ISDN PBX).
For example: VPIM 7035255550/EXT 227
The distribution list syntax, that is a phone number followed by "/DL " defining the list, would be used to refer to a distribution list associated with the phone number (with or without an extension).
For example: VPIM  14165977230/DL 93 4.2.2.
The Voice address For voice messages that are intended to be sent as a voice outdialing at the destination system, the service selector element is defined to be: voice service selector
[ sub addr spec ]
For more clarity, here is an example of a very simple voice mbox: VOICE  3940226338 4.2.3.
The AMIS address For voice messages that are intended to be sent as AMIS (Audio Messaging Interchange Specification)
voice mail messages (as defined in [AMIS A] and [AMIS D]), the service selector element is defined to be: amis service selector
The resultant amis address and amis mbox are formally amis address
( amis a / amis d ) amis a   amis a number
Note also that the total ; length of this field is restricted to 32 ; characters by AMIS D. amis mailbox numberplan   1 VCHAR amis mailbox
1 16(VCHAR) amis mailbox extension
1 VCHAR amis sysnum    amis
a number amis a number
( amis PSTN number / amis private number )
; This is in agreement with ITU [E.164] ; specification and per [AMIS A]
the ; maximum length is 15 numeric digits.
[AMIS A] indicates that maximum permitted ; length of the private number is 14 ;
1 4(DIGIT) area code   1
For more clarity, here is an example of a simple AMIS A amis mbox:
AMIS  1/401 3278144 /SYSNUM 1 401 3279542
The fax address Fax addresses used in VPIM are formatted as defined in [FAX ADDR], section 2. 4.3.
VPIM Submission Addresses Based on [GSTN ADDR]
, these are the resultant email addresses for the LHS presented above.
VPIM and IVM  systems that support submission MUST accept, translate (if necessary), and forward messages sent to these addresses.
The vpim email element is a specific version of pstn email for VPIM over the Internet e mail transport system, where the service selector distinction is set to "VPIM".
In this case the mta I pstn will usually point to a VPIM capable messaging system where the attached message will be delivered properly.
The voice email element is a specific version of pstn email for the voice outdialing over the Internet e mail transport system, where the service selector distinction is set to "VOICE".
In this case the mta I pstn will usually point to a device that will perform an outdial, that is for example, make a telephone call to the specified number and play a voice attachment.
The amis email element is a specific version of pstn email for the AMIS over the Internet e mail transport system, where the service  selector distinction is set to "AMIS".
In this case the mta I pstn will usually point to a device that acts as a gateway to an AMIS network where the attached voice message will be delivered properly.
The fax email Fax email addresses used in VPIM are formatted as defined in [FAX  ADDR], section 4.
Most security considerations are already identified in [VPIM2] and [IVM].
An additional concern would be that the sender must trust and also be aware of the policies of the submission MTA to which the message is submitted.
This is because, that MTA will make the determination of where the final destination is and how it will be delivered based on the VPIM submission LHS.
Submission MTAs should take care to not blindly place outdial calls to any number submitted (e.g., international numbers or "1 900" numbers).
Ideally, senders should be authenticated to confirm their outdialing privileges.
IANA Registration form for new value of GSTN address service selector "VPIM"
Subject: Registration of new values for the GSTN address service selector specifier "VPIM" service selector name:
VPIM Description of Use: VPIM specify that the GSTN address refers to a voice mailbox that is intended to accept a VPIM message.
For a complete description refer to "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
Security Considerations: See the Security Consideration section of "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
Person & email address to contact for further information:
Glenn W. Parsons Nortel Networks P.0.
Box 3511 Station C Ottawa, On  K1Y 4H7 Canada Phone:  1 613 763 7582
IANA Registration form for new value of GSTN address service selector "VOICE"
Subject: Registration of new values for the GSTN address service selector specifier "VOICE" service selector name:
VOICE Description of Use: VOICE specify that the GSTN address refers to a voice device that is intended to be sent a voice message via an 'outdialing'.
For a complete description refer to "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)  Addressing", RFC 3804.
Security Considerations: See the Security Consideration section of "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
Person & email address to contact for further information:
Glenn W. Parsons Nortel Networks P.0.
Box 3511 Station C Ottawa, On  K1Y 4H7 Canada Phone:  1 613 763 7582
IANA Registration form for new value of GSTN address service selector "AMIS"
Subject: Registration of new values for the GSTN address service selector specifier "AMIS" service selector name:
AMIS Description of Use: AMIS specify that the GSTN address refers to a voice mailbox that is intended to be sent an AMIS (Audio Messaging Interchange Specification) voice mail message.
For a complete description refer to "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
Security Considerations: See the Security Consideration section of "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
Person & email address to contact for further information:
Glenn W. Parsons Nortel Networks P.0.
Box 3511 Station C Ottawa, On  K1Y 4H7 Canada Phone:  1 613 763 7582
IANA Registration form for new value of GSTN address qualif type1 keyword and value "SYSNUM"
Subject: Registration of new values for the GSTN address
The use of "SYSNUM" is restricted to "AMIS" service  selector, is it has no meaning outside the AMIS service.
Security Considerations: See the Security Consideration section of "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
Person & email address to contact for further information:
Glenn W. Parsons Nortel Networks P.0.
Box 3511 Station C Ottawa, On  K1Y 4H7 Canada Phone:  1 613 763 7582
IANA Registration form for new value of GSTN address qualif type1 keyword and value "EXT"
Subject: Registration of new values for the GSTN address qualif type1 element "EXT" qualif type1 "keyword" name: ext qualif type1 "value" ABNF definition: ext
(DIGIT) Description of Use: EXT is used to specify the numeric optional extension That identifies a particular VPIM mailbox as described in "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
The use of "EXT" is intended for the "VPIM" service  selector, however is may have meaning and be used outside the VPIM service.
Security Considerations: See the Security Consideration section of "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
Person & email address to contact for further information:
Glenn W. Parsons Nortel Networks P.0.
Box 3511 Station C Ottawa, On  K1Y 4H7 Canada Phone:  1 613 763 7582
IANA Registration form for new value of GSTN address qualif type1 keyword and value "DL"
Subject: Registration of new values for the GSTN address qualif type1 element "DL" qualif type1 "keyword" name:
dl qualif type1 "value" ABNF definition: dl   1
(DIGIT) Description of Use: DL is used to specify the numeric optional personal Distribution list for a particular VPIM mailbox as described in "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
The use of "DL" is intended for the "VPIM" service  selector, however is may have meaning and be used outside the VPIM service.
Security Considerations: See the Security Consideration section of "Voice Profile for Internet Mail (VPIM)
Person & email address to contact for further information:
Glenn W. Parsons Nortel Networks P.0.
Box 3511 Station C Ottawa, On  K1Y 4H7 Canada Phone:  1 613 763 7582
