Abstract This document defines a schema, object classes and attributes, for printers and printer services, for use with directories that support Lightweight Directory Access Protocol v3 (LDAP TS).
This document is based on the printer attributes listed in Appendix E of Internet Printing Protocol/1.1 (IPP) (RFC 2911).
A few additional printer attributes are based on definitions in the Printer MIB (RFC 1759).
This document defines several object classes to provide Lightweight Directory Access Protocol v3 [LDAP TS] applications with flexible options in defining printer information using LDAP schema.
Classes are provided for defining directory entries with common printer information as well as for extending existing directory entries with SLPv2 [RFC2608], IPP/1.1 [RFC2911], and LPR [RFC1179] specific information.
The schema defined in this document is based on the printer attributes listed in Appendix E 'Generic Directory Schema' of Internet Printing Protocol/1.1 (IPP) [RFC2911].
A few additional printer attributes are based on definitions in the Printer MIB [RFC1759].
The schema defined in this document is technically aligned with the stable IANA registered 'service:
printer:' v2.0 template [SLP PRT], for compatibility with already deployed Service Location Protocol
[RFC2608] service advertising and discovery infrastructure.
The attribute syntaxes are technically aligned with the 'service:printer:' v2.0 template therefore simpler types are sometimes used (for example, 'DirectoryString' [RFC2252] rather than 'labeledURI' [RFC2079] for the 'printer uri' attribute).
Please send comments directly to the authors at the addresses listed in Section 13 "Authors' Addresses".
Rationale for using DirectoryString Syntax
The attribute syntax 'DirectoryString' (UTF 8 [RFC2279]) defined in [RFC2252] is specified for several groups of string attributes that are defined in this document:
1)  URI printer uri, printer xri supported, printer more info
The UTF 8 encoding is forward compatible with any future deployment of (UTF 8 based) IRI (Internationalized Resource Identifiers) [W3C IRI] currently being developed by the W3C Internationalization Working Group. 2)  Description printer name, printer location, printer info, printer make and model The UTF 8 encoding
supports descriptions in any language, conformant with the "IETF Policy on Character Sets and Languages" [RFC2277].
The printer natural language configured attribute contains a language tag [RFC3066] for these description attributes (for example, to support text to speech conversions).
3)  Keyword printer compression supported, printer finishings supported, printer media supported, printer media local supported, printer print quality supported The UTF 8 encoding is compatible with the current IPP/1.1 [RFC2911] definition of the equivalent attributes, most of which have the IPP/1.1 union syntax 'keyword or name'.
The keyword attributes defined in this document are extensible by site specific or vendor specific 'names' which behave like new 'keywords' Note:
In IPP/1.1, each value is strongly typed over the wire as either 'keyword' or 'name'.
This union selector is not preserved in the definitions of these equivalent LDAP attributes.
The EQUALITY matching rule 'caseIgnoreMatch' defined in [RFC2252] is specified for several groups of string attributes that are defined in this document:
These URI attributes specify EQUALITY matching with 'caseIgnoreMatch' (rather than with 'caseExactMatch') in order to conform to the spirit of [RFC2396], which requires case insensitive matching on the host part of a URI versus case sensitive matching on the remainder of a URI.
These URI attributes follow existing practice of supporting case insensitive equality matching for host names in the associatedDomain attribute defined in [RFC1274].
Either equality matching rule choice would be a compromise: a) case sensitive whole URI matching may lead to false negative matches and has been shown to be fragile (given deployed client applications that 'pretty up' host names displayed and transferred in URI)
; b) case insensitive whole URI matching may lead to false positive matches, although it is a dangerous practice to publish URI that differ only by case (for example, in the path elements).
2)  Description Case insensitive equality matching is more user friendly for description attributes.
3)  Keyword Case insensitive equality matching is more user friendly for keyword attributes.
Rationale for using caseIgnoreSubstringsMatch The SUBSTR matching rule 'caseIgnoreSubstringsMatch' defined in [RFC2252] is specified for several groups of string attributes that are defined in this document:
These URI attributes follow existing practice of supporting case insensitive equality matching for host names in the associatedDomain attribute defined in [RFC1274].
2)  Description Support for case insensitive substring matching is more user friendly for description attributes.
3)  Keyword Support for case insensitive substring matching is more user friendly for keyword attributes.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
Schema definitions are provided using LDAPv3 [LDAP TS] description formats.
Definitions provided here are formatted (line wrapped) for readability.
We define the following LDAP object classes for use with both generic printer related information and services specific to SLPv2
IPP/1.1 [RFC2911], and LPR [RFC1179].
slpServicePrinter auxiliary class for SLP registered printers printerAbstract abstract class for all printer classes printerService structural class for printers printerServiceAuxClass auxiliary class for printers
printerIPP auxiliary class for IPP printers printerLPR auxiliary class for LPR printers
The following are some examples of how applications may choose to use these classes when creating directory entries: 1)  Use printerService for directory entries containing common printer information.
2)  Use both printerService and slpServicePrinter for directory entries containing common printer information for SLP registered printers.
3)  Use printerService, printerLPR and printerIPP for directory entries containing common printer information for printers that support both LPR and IPP.
Use printerServiceAuxClass and object classes not defined by this document for directory entries containing common printer information.
In this example, printerServiceAuxClass is used for extending other structural classes defining printer information with common printer information defined in this document.
Refer to Section 4 for definition of attribute types referenced by these object classes.
We use attribute names instead of OIDs in object class definitions for clarity.
Some attribute names described in [RFC2911] have been prefixed with 'printer ' as recommended in [RFC2926] and [SLP PRT].
DESC  'Service Location Protocol (SLP) information.'
This auxiliary class defines Service Location Protocol (SLPv2)
It should be used with a structural class such as printerService.
It may be used to create new or extend existing directory entries with SLP 'service:printer' abstract service type information as defined in [SLP PRT].
This object class is derived from 'slpService', the parent class for all SLP services, defined in [RFC2926].
( 1.3.18.0.2.6.258 NAME  'printerAbstract' DESC  'Printer related information.'
( printer name $ printer natural language configured $ printer location $ printer info $ printer more info $ printer make and model $ printer multiple document jobs supported $ printer charset configured $ printer charset supported $ printer generated natural language supported $ printer document format supported $ printer color supported $ printer compression supported $ printer pages per minute $ printer pages per minute color $ printer finishings supported $ printer number up supported $ printer sides supported $ printer media supported $ printer media local supported $ printer resolution supported $ printer print quality supported $ printer job priority supported $ printer copies supported $ printer job k octets supported $ printer current operator $ printer service person $ printer delivery orientation supported $ printer stacking order supported $ printer output features supported ) )
This abstract class defines printer information.
It is a base class for deriving other printer related classes, such as, but not limited to, classes defined in this document.
It defines a common set of printer attributes that are not specific to any one type of service, protocol or operating system.
( 1.3.18.0.2.6.255 NAME  'printerService' DESC  'Printer information.'
This structural class defines printer information.
It is derived from class printerAbstract and thus inherits common printer attributes.
This class can be used with or without auxiliary classes to define printer information.
Auxiliary classes can be used to extend the common printer information with protocol, service or operating system specific information.
Note:  When extending other structural classes with auxiliary classes, printerService should not be used.
printerServiceAuxClass ( 1.3.18.0.2.6.257 NAME  '
This auxiliary class defines printer information.
It is derived from class printerAbstract and thus inherits common printer attributes.
This class should be used with a structural class.
( 1.3.18.0.2.6.256 NAME  'printerIPP' DESC  'Internet Printing Protocol (IPP) information.'
This auxiliary class defines Internet Printing Protocol (IPP/1.1)
It should be used with a structural class such as printerService.
It is used to extend structural classes with IPP specific printer information.
printerLPR ( 1.3.18.0.2.6.253 NAME  'printerLPR' DESC  'LPR information.'
MUST  ( printer name )
This auxiliary class defines LPR [RFC1179] information.
It should be used with a structural class such as printerService.
It is used to identify directory entries that support LPR.
The following attribute types are referenced by the object classes defined in Section 3.
The following attribute types reference syntax OIDs defined in Section 6 of [RFC2252]
(see Section 5 'Definition of Syntaxes' below).
The following attribute types reference matching rule names (instead of OIDs) for clarity (see Section 6 below).
For optional attributes, if the printer information is not known, the attribute value should not be set.
In the following definitions, referenced matching rules are defined in Section 8 of [RFC2252] and/or Section 2 of [RFC3698]
(see Section 6 'Definition of Matching Rules' below).
The following table is a summary of the attribute names defined by this document and their corresponding names from [RFC2911].
Some attribute names described in [RFC2911] have been prefixed with 'printer ' as recommended in [RFC2926], to address the flat namespace for LDAP identifiers.
k octets supported printer current operator printer service person printer delivery orientation supported printer stacking order supported printer output features supported printer aliases 4.1.
( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1140 NAME 'printer uri' DESC 'A URI supported by this printer.'
If the printer xri supported LDAP attribute is implemented, then this printer uri value should be listed in printer xri supported.
Values of URI should conform to [RFC2396], although URI schemes may be defined which do not conform to [RFC2396] (see [RFC2717] and [RFC2718]).
Note:  LDAP application clients should not attempt to use malformed URI values read from this attribute.
LDAP administrative clients should not write malformed URI values into this attribute.
Note:  For SLP registered printers, the LDAP printer uri attribute should be set to the value of the SLP registered URL of the printer, for interworking with SLPv2 [RFC2608] service discovery.
Note:  See Sections 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3 for rationale for design choices.
printer xri supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1107 NAME 'printer xri supported' DESC 'The unordered list of XRI (extended resource identifiers) supported by this printer.'
EQUALITY caseIgnoreMatch SUBSTR caseIgnoreSubstringsMatch SYNTAX 1.3.6.1.4.1.1466.115.121.1.15 )
A list of XRI (extended resource identifiers) supported by this printer.
Each value of this list should consist of a URI (uniform resource identifier) followed by (optional) authentication and security fields.
Values of URI should conform to [RFC2396], although URI schemes may be defined which do not conform to [RFC2396] (see [RFC2717] and [RFC2718]).
Note:  LDAP application clients should not attempt to use malformed URI values read from this attribute.
LDAP administrative clients should not write malformed URI values into this attribute.
This attribute is based on 'printer uri supported', 'uri  authentication supported', and `'uri security supported' (called the 'Three Musketeers' because they are parallel ordered attributes) defined in IPP/1.1
This attribute unfolds those IPP/1.1 attributes and thus avoids the ordering (and same number of values) constraints of the IPP/1.1 separate attributes.
Defined keywords for fields include: 'uri' (IPP 'printer uri supported') 'auth' (IPP 'uri authentication supported') 'sec' (IPP 'uri security supported')
A missing 'auth' field should be interpreted to mean 'none'.
, defined values of the 'auth' field include: 'none' (no authentication for this URI) 'requesting user name' (from operation request) 'basic' (HTTP/1.1 Basic
HTTP/1.1 Basic, [RFC2617]) 'certificate' (from certificate)
A missing 'sec' field should be interpreted to mean 'none'.
, defined values of the 'sec' field include: 'none' (no security for this URI) '
ssl3' (Netscape SSL3) 'tls' (IETF TLS/1.0,
For example: 'uri ipp://foo.com< auth digest
< sec tls<' 'uri lpr://bar.com< auth none< sec none<' 'uri mailto:printer@foobar.com< auth none<
The syntax and delimiter for this attribute are aligned with the equivalent attribute in the 'service:
printer:' v2.0 template [SLP PRT].
Note that this delimiter differs from printer  resolution supported.
See Sections 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3 for rationale for design choices.
printer name ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1135 NAME 'printer name' DESC 'The site specific administrative name of this printer.'
Values of this attribute should be specified in the language specified in printer natural language configured (for example, to support text to speech conversions), although the printer's name may be specified in any language.
This name may be the last part of the printer's URI or it may be completely unrelated.
This name may contain characters that are not allowed in a conventional URI (see [RFC2396]).
printer natural language configured ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1119 NAME 'printer natural language configured' DESC 'The configured natural language in which error and status messages will be generated (by default) by this printer.'
Also, a possible natural language for printer string attributes set by operator, system administrator, or manufacturer.
Also, the (declared) natural language of the printer name, printer location, printer info, and printer make and model attributes of this printer.
Values of language tags should conform to "Tags for the Identification of Languages" [RFC3066].
For example: 'en us' (English as spoken in the US) '
fr fr' (French as spoken in France)
[RFC2911], language tags in this attribute should be lowercase normalized.
printer location ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1136 NAME 'printer location' DESC 'The physical location of this printer.'
For example: 'Room 123A' 'Second floor of building XYZ' 4.6.
printer info ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1139 NAME 'printer info' DESC 'Descriptive information about this printer.'
For example: 'This printer can be used for printing color transparencies for HR presentations' 'Out of courtesy for others, please print only small (1 5 page) jobs at this printer' 'This printer is going away on July 1, 1997, please find a new printer' 4.7.
printer more info ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1134 NAME 'printer more info' DESC 'A URI for more information about this specific printer.'
For example, this could be an HTTP type URI referencing an HTML page accessible to a Web Browser.
The information obtained from this URI is intended for end user consumption.
Values of URI should conform to [RFC2396], although URI schemes may be defined which do not conform to [RFC2396] (see [RFC2717] and [RFC2718]).
Note:  LDAP application clients should not attempt to use malformed URI values read from this attribute.
LDAP administrative clients should not write malformed URI values into this attribute.
Note:  See Sections 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3 for rationale for design choices.
printer make and model ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1138 NAME 'printer make and model' DESC 'Make and model of this printer.'
The printer manufacturer may initially populate this attribute.
printer ipp versions supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1133 NAME 'printer ipp versions supported' DESC 'IPP protocol version(s) that this printer supports.'
The IPP protocol version(s) should include major and minor versions, i.e., the exact version numbers for which this Printer implementation meets the IPP version specific conformance requirements.
printer multiple document jobs supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1132 NAME 'printer multiple document jobs supported' DESC '
Indicates whether or not this printer supports more than one document per job.'
( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1109 NAME 'printer charset configured' DESC 'The configured charset in which error and status messages will be generated (by default) by this printer.'
Also, a possible charset for printer string attributes set by operator, system administrator, or manufacturer.
For example: 'utf 8' (ISO 10646/
Unicode in UTF 8 transform [RFC2279]) '
(Latin1) Values of charset tags should be defined in the IANA Registry of Coded Character Sets [IANA CHAR]
(see also [RFC2978]) and the '(preferred MIME name)' should be used as the charset tag in this attribute.
For consistency with IPP/1.1 [RFC2911], charset tags in this attribute should be lowercase normalized.
printer charset supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1131 NAME 'printer charset supported' DESC 'Set of charsets supported for the attribute values of syntax DirectoryString for this directory entry.'
For example: 'utf 8' (ISO 10646/
Unicode in UTF 8 transform [RFC2279]) '
(Latin1) Values of charset tags should be defined in the IANA Registry of Coded Character Sets [IANA CHAR]
(see also [RFC2978]) and the '(preferred MIME name)' should be used as the charset tag in this attribute.
For consistency with IPP/1.1 [RFC2911], charset tags in this attribute should be lowercase normalized.
printer generated natural language supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1137 NAME 'printer generated natural language supported' DESC 'Natural language(s) supported for this directory entry.'
Values of language tags should conform to "Tags for the Identification of Languages" [RFC3066].
For example: 'en us' (English as spoken in the US) '
fr fr' (French as spoken in France)
[RFC2911], language tags in this attribute should be lowercase normalized.
printer document format supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1130 NAME 'printer document format supported' DESC 'The possible source document formats which may be interpreted and printed by this printer.'
Values of document formats should be MIME media types defined in the IANA Registry of MIME Media Types
[IANA MIME] (see also [RFC2048]).
printer color supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1129 NAME 'printer color supported' DESC 'Indicates whether this printer is capable of any type of color printing at all, including highlight color.'
printer compression supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1128 NAME 'printer compression supported' DESC 'Compression algorithms supported by this printer.'
[RFC2911] include: 'none' (no compression is used) 'deflate' (public domain ZIP described in [RFC1951]) 'gzip'
(GNU ZIP described in [RFC1952])
'compress' (UNIX compression described in [RFC1977]) 4.17.
printer pages per minute ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1127 NAME 'printer pages per minute' DESC 'The nominal number of pages per minute which may be output by this printer.'
This attribute is informative, not a service guarantee.
Typically, it is the value used in marketing literature to describe this printer.
For example, the value for a simplex or black and white print mode.
printer pages per minute color ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1126 NAME 'printer pages per minute color' DESC 'The nominal number of color pages per minute which may be output by this printer.'
This attribute is informative, not a service guarantee.
Typically, it is the value used in marketing literature to describe this printer.
printer finishings supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1125 NAME 'printer finishings supported' DESC 'The possible finishing operations supported by this printer.'
[RFC2911] include:  'none', 'staple', 'punch', 'cover', 'bind', 'saddle stitch', 'edge stitch', 'staple top left', 'staple bottom left', 'staple top right', 'staple bottom right', 'edge stitch left', 'edge stitch top', 'edge stitch right', 'edge stitch bottom', 'staple dual left', 'staple dual top', 'staple dual right', 'staple dual bottom'.
Note:  Implementations may support other values.
printer number up supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1124 NAME 'printer number up supported' DESC 'The possible numbers of print stream pages to impose upon a single side of an instance of a selected medium.'
[RFC2911] include: '1', '2', and '4'.
Note:  Implementations may support other values.
printer sides supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1123 NAME 'printer sides supported' DESC 'The number of impression sides (one or two) and the two sided impression rotations supported by this printer.'
[RFC2911] include:  'one sided', 'two  sided long edge', 'two sided short edge'.'
printer media supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1122 NAME 'printer media supported' DESC 'The standard names/types/sizes (and optional color suffixes) of the media supported by this printer.'
Values are defined in IPP/1.1 [RFC2911] or any IANA registered extensions.
For example: 'iso a4' 'envelope' '
printer media local supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1117 NAME 'printer media local supported' DESC 'Site specific names of media supported by this printer.'
Values should be in the natural language specified by printer  natural language configured.
For example: 'purchasing form' (site specific name) as opposed to 'na letter' (standard keyword from IPP/1.1
in the printer media supported attribute.
printer resolution supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1121 NAME 'printer resolution supported' DESC 'List of resolutions supported for printing documents by this printer.'
Each resolution value should be a string containing 3 fields: 1)
Cross feed direction resolution (positive integer); 2)  Feed direction resolution (positive integer); 3)  Unit 'dpi' (dots per inch) or 'dpcm' (dots per centimeter).
This attribute is based on 'printer resolution supported' defined in IPP/1.1
[RFC2911] (which has a binary complex encoding) derived from 'prtMarkerAddressabilityFeedDir', 'prtMarkerAddressabilityXFeedDir', and 'prtMarkerAddressabilityUnit' defined in the Printer MIB [RFC1759] (which have integer encodings).
The syntax and delimiter for this attribute are aligned with the equivalent attribute in the 'service:
printer:' v2.0 template [SLP PRT].
Whitespace is permitted after (but not before)
Note that this delimiter differs from printer xri  supported.
printer print quality supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1120 NAME 'printer print quality supported' DESC 'List of print qualities supported for printing documents on this printer.'
[RFC2911] include: 'unknown' 'draft' 'normal' 'high' 4.26.
printer job priority supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1110 NAME 'printer job priority supported' DESC '
Indicates the number of job priority levels supported by this printer.'
An IPP/1.1 [RFC2911] conformant Printer, which supports job priority, always supports a full range of priorities from '1' to '100' (to ensure consistent behavior), therefore this attribute describes the 'granularity' of priority supported.
Values of this attribute are from '1' to '100'.
printer copies supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1118 NAME 'printer copies supported' DESC 'The maximum number of copies of a document that may be printed as a single job on this printer.'
A positive value indicates the maximum supported copies.
A value of '0' indicates no maximum limit.
A value of ' 1' indicates 'unknown'.
Note:  The syntax and values for this attribute are aligned with the equivalent attribute in the 'service:
printer:' v2.0 template [SLP  PRT].
printer job k octets supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1111 NAME 'printer job k octets supported' DESC 'The maximum size in kilobytes (1,024 octets actually) incoming print job that this printer will accept.'
A positive value indicates the maximum supported job size.
A value of '0' indicates no maximum limit.
A value of ' 1' indicates 'unknown'.
Note:  The syntax and values for this attribute are aligned with the equivalent attribute in the 'service:
printer:' v2.0 template [SLP  PRT].
printer current operator ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1112 NAME 'printer current operator' DESC '
The identity of the current human operator responsible for operating this printer.'
The value of this attribute should include information that would enable other humans to reach the operator, such as a telephone number.
printer service person ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1113 NAME 'printer service person' DESC '
The identity of the current human service person responsible for servicing this printer.'
The value of this attribute should include information that would enable other humans to reach the service person, such as a telephone number.
printer delivery orientation supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1114 NAME 'printer delivery orientation supported' DESC 'The possible delivery orientations of pages as they are printed and ejected from this printer.'
Values defined include: 'unknown' 'face up' 'face down' Note:
The syntax and values for this attribute are aligned with the equivalent attribute in the 'service:
printer:' v2.0 template [SLP  PRT].
printer stacking order supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1115 NAME 'printer stacking order supported' DESC 'The possible stacking order of pages as they are printed and ejected from this printer.'
unknown' 'first to last' 'last to first' Note:
The syntax and values for this attribute are aligned with the equivalent attribute in the 'service:
printer:' v2.0 template [SLP  PRT].
printer output features supported ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1116 NAME 'printer output features supported' DESC '
The possible output features supported by this printer.'
Values defined include: 'unknown' 'bursting' 'decollating' 'page collating' '
The syntax and values for this attribute are aligned with the equivalent attribute in the 'service:
printer:' v2.0 template [SLP  PRT].
Note:  Implementations may support other values.
printer aliases ( 1.3.18.0.2.4.1108 NAME 'printer aliases' DESC 'List of site specific administrative names of this printer in addition to the value specified for printer name.'
Values of this attribute should be specified in the language specified in printer natural language configured (for example, to support text to speech conversions), although the printer's alias may be specified in any language.
No new attribute syntaxes are defined by this document.
No new matching rules are defined by this document.
The attribute types defined in Section 4 of this document reference matching rules defined in Section 8 of [RFC2252] and/or Section 2 of [RFC3698], which are summarized below:
This document does not define any new syntaxes or matching rules.
This document does define the following Object Identifier Descriptors.
They have been registered by the IANA:
Classes Subject:  Request for LDAP Descriptor Registration Descriptor (short name):
see table below Object Identifier:
see table below Person & email address to contact for further information:
Pat Fleming IBM Highway 52
1 507 253 7583 EMail:
Registration of Attribute Types Subject:  Request for LDAP Descriptor Registration Descriptor (short name):  see table below Object Identifier:  see table below Person & email address to contact for further information:
Pat Fleming IBM Highway 52
1 507 253 7583 EMail:
All text string attributes defined in this document of syntax [RFC2279], as required by [RFC2252].
A language tag [RFC3066] for all of the text string attributes defined in this document is contained in the printer natural  language configured attribute.
Therefore, all object classes defined in this document conform to the "IETF Policy on Character Sets and Languages" [RFC2277].
Security Considerations See [RFC2829] for detailed guidance on authentication methods for LDAP.
See [RFC2830] for detailed guidance of using TLS/1.0 [RFC2246] to supply connection confidentiality and data integrity for LDAP sessions.
As with any LDAP schema, it is important to protect specific entries and attributes with the appropriate access control.
It is particularly important that only administrators can modify entries defined in this LDAP printer schema.
Otherwise, an LDAP client might be fooled into diverting print service requests from the original printer (or spooler) to a malicious intruder's host system, thus exposing the information in printed documents.
For additional security considerations of deploying printers in an IPP environment, see Section 8 of [RFC2911].
