Abstract This document defines a generic information structure for information carried in routing protocol Interface Switching Capability Descriptor (ISCD)
Switching Capability Specific Information (SCSI) fields.
This "Generalized SCSI" can be used with routing protocols that define GMPLS ISCDs and any specific technology.
This document does not modify any existing technology specific formats and is defined for use in conjunction with new GMPLS Switching Capability types.
The context for this document is Generalized MPLS, and the reader is expected to be familiar with the GMPLS architecture and associated protocol standards.
The context for this document is Generalized MPLS, and the reader is expected to be familiar with the GMPLS architecture, associated terminology, and protocol standards: notably, but not limited to, [RFC3945], [RFC4202], [RFC4203] and [RFC5307].
The Interface Switching Capability Descriptor (ISCD)
[RFC4202] allows routing protocols such as OSPF and ISIS to carry technology specific information in the Switching Capability specific information field, see [RFC4203] and [RFC5307].
The format of an SCSI field is dictated by the specific technology being represented as indicated by the ISCD Switching Capability field.
Existing Switching Capabilities are managed by IANA in the "Switching Types" registry <http://www.iana.org/assignments/gmpls sig parameters
> and the related "IANA GMPLS TC MIB" definitions.
[RFC7138] introduced a "sub TLV" structure to its technology specific SCSI field.
The sub TLV based approach allows for greater flexibility in the structure, ordering, and ability to support extensions of the SC specific format.
This Sub TLV approach is also used in [RFC7688].
This document generalizes this approach and defines a new generalized SCSI field format for use by future specific technologies and Switching Capability types.
The generalized SCSI carries SCSI TLVs that may be defined within the scope of a specific technology or shared across multiple technologies (e.g., [AVAIL EXT]).
This document also establishes a registry for SCSI TLV definitions that may be shared across multiple technologies.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
The reader is expected to be familiar with GMPLS terminology (e.g., as found in [RFC3945]) as well as the terminology used in [RFC4202], [RFC4203], and [RFC5307].
The Generalized SCSI is composed of zero or more variable length TLV fields each of which is called an "SCSI TLV".
There are no specific size restrictions on these SCSI TLVs.
Size and other formatting restrictions may be imposed by the routing protocol ISCD field (refer to [RFC4203] and [RFC5307]).
Please refer to [RFC3630] for the treatment of malformed Link TLVs.
TLV Format Type (2 octets):
This field indicates the type and structure of the information contained in the Value field.
Length (2 octets): This field MUST be set to the size, in octets (bytes), of the Value field.
The value of the field MUST be zero or divisible by 4.
Note that this implies that the Value field can be omitted or contain padding.
Value (variable): A variable length field, formatted according to the definition indicated by value of the Type field.
This field can be omitted for certain types.
The ISCD can include a Generalized SCSI when advertising technologies whose Switching Capability definition references this document.
The corollary of this is that the Generalized SCSI MUST NOT be used for ISCDs of technologies whose Switching Capability definition do not reference this document.
The Generalized SCSI MAY contain a sequence of zero or more SCSI  TLVs.
Sub TLV parsing (format) errors MUST be treated as a malformed ISCD.
SCSI TLVs MUST be processed in the order received and, if re  originated, ordering MUST be preserved.
Unknown SCSI TLVs MUST be ignored and transparently processed, i.e., re originated when appropriate.
Processing related to multiple SCSI TLVs of the same type may be further refined based on the definition on the type.
This document does not introduce any security issue beyond those discussed in [RFC4203] and [RFC5307].
As discussed there, the information carried in ISCDs is not used for Shortest Path First (SPF) computation or normal routing, and the extensions here defined do not have a direct effect on IP routing.
Tampering with GMPLS Traffic Engineering (TE
) Link State Advertisements (LSAs) may have an effect on the underlying transport network.
Mechanisms such as those described in [RFC2154] and [RFC5304] to protect the transmission of this information are suggested.
This document defines a new SCSI TLV that is carried in the SCSI field of the ISCDs defined in [RFC4203] and [RFC5307].
The SCSI TLV includes a 16 bit type identifier (the Type field).
The same Type field values are applicable to the new SCSI TLV.
IANA has created and will maintain a new registry, the "Generalized SCSI (Switching Capability Specific Information)
TLV Types" registry under the "Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Parameters" registry.
The initial contents of this registry are as follows:
New allocation requests to this registry must indicate the value or values to be used in the Switching Type column.
The registry should be established with registration policies of "Specification Required", see [RFC8126].
