Abstract RFC 2763 defined a simple and dynamic mechanism for routers running
IS IS to learn about symbolic hostnames.
RFC 2763 defined a new TLV that allows the IS IS routers to flood their name to systemID mapping information across the IS IS network.
This document obsoletes RFC 2763.
This document moves the capability provided by RFC 2763 to the Standards Track.
IS uses a variable 1 8 byte system ID (normally 6 bytes) to represent a node in the network.
For management and operation reasons, network operators need to check the status of IS IS adjacencies, entries in the routing table, and the content of the IS IS link state database.
It is obvious that, when looking at diagnostics information, hexadecimal representations of system IDs and Link State Protocol Data Unit (LSP) identifiers are less clear than symbolic names.
One way to overcome this problem is to define a name to systemID mapping on a router.
This mapping can be used bidirectionally, e.g., to find symbolic names for system IDs and to find system IDs for symbolic names.
One way to build this table of mappings is by static definitions.
Among network administrators who use IS IS as their IGP, it is current practice to define such static mappings.
Thus, every router has to maintain a statically configured table with mappings between router names and system IDs.
These tables need to contain the names and system IDs of all routers in the network, and must be modified each time an addition, deletion, or change occurs.
There are several ways one could build such a table.
One is via static configurations.
Another scheme that could be implemented is via DNS lookups.
In this document, we provide a third solution, which in wide scale implementation and deployment has proven to be easier and more manageable than static mapping or DNS schemes.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
The obvious drawback of static configuration of mappings is the issue of scalability and maintainability.
The network operators have to maintain the name tables.
They have to maintain an entry in the table for every router in the network, on every router in the network.
The effort to create and maintain these static tables grows with the total number of routers on the network.
Changing the name or system ID of one router, or adding a new router will affect the configurations of all the other routers on the network.
This will make it very likely that those static tables are outdated.
Having one table that can be updated in a centralized place would be helpful.
One could imagine using the DNS system for this.
A drawback is that during the time of network problems, the response time of DNS services might not be satisfactory or the DNS services might not even be available.
Another possible drawback might be the added complexity of DNS.
Also, some DNS implementations might not support A and PTR records for Connection Network Service (CLNS)
Network Service Access Points (NSAPs).
A third way to build dynamic mappings would be to use the transport mechanism of the routing protocol itself to advertise symbolic names in IS IS link state PDUs.
This document defines a new TLV that allows the IS IS routers to include the name to systemID mapping data in their LSPs.
This will allow simple and reliable transport of name mapping information across the IS IS network.
The Dynamic hostname TLV is defined here as TLV type 137.
Length total length of the value field.
Value a string of 1 to 255 bytes.
The Dynamic hostname TLV is optional.
This TLV may be present in any fragment of a non pseudonode LSP.
The value field identifies the symbolic name of the router originating the LSP.
This symbolic name can be the FQDN for the router, it can be a subset of the FQDN, or it can be any string operators want to use for the router.
The use of FQDN or a subset of it is strongly recommended.
The content of this value is a domain name, see [RFC2181].
The string is not null  terminated.
The system ID of this router can be derived from the LSP identifier.
If this TLV is present in a pseudonode LSP, then it SHOULD NOT be interpreted as the DNS hostname of the router.
The Value field is encoded in 7 bit ASCII.
If a user interface for configuring or displaying this field permits Unicode characters, that user interface is responsible for applying the ToASCII and/or ToUnicode algorithm as described in [RFC3490] to achieve the correct format for transmission or display.
The Dynamic hostname TLV is optional.
When originating an LSP, a router may decide to include this TLV in its LSP.
Upon receipt of an LSP with the Dynamic hostname TLV, a router may decide to ignore this TLV, or to install the symbolic name and system ID in its hostname mapping table for the IS IS network.
A router may also optionally insert this TLV in its pseudonode LSP for the association of a symbolic name to a local LAN.
If a system receives a mapping for a name or system ID that is different from the mapping in the local cache, an implementation SHOULD replace the existing mapping with the latest information.
Security Considerations Since the name to systemID mapping relies on information provided by the routers themselves, a misconfigured or compromised router can inject false mapping information.
Thus, this information needs to be treated with suspicion when, for example, doing diagnostics about a suspected security incident.
This document raises no other new security issues for IS IS.
Security issues with IS IS are discussed in [RFC5304].
This document specifies TLV 137, "Dynamic Name".
This TLV has already been allocated and reserved [RFC2763].
As such, no new actions are required on the part of IANA.
