Electronic Data Interchange Internet Integration (EDIINT)
With the maturity of the Electronic Data Interchange Internet Integration (EDIINT) standards of AS1, AS2, and AS3, applications and additional features are being built upon the basic secure transport functionality.
These features are not necessarily supported by all EDIINT applications and could cause potential problems with implementations.
The EDIINT Features header field provides a means to resolve these problems and support new functionality.
Introduction EDIINT applications provide for a secure means of payload document transport.
The original intent was for transport of a single EDI or XML document.
However, as AS1 [RFC3335], AS2 [RFC4130], and AS3 [RFC4823] matured, other features and application logic were implemented upon EDIINT standards.
Since these features go beyond (but do not violate)
the basic premise of EDIINT, a means is needed to communicate to trading partners features that are supported by the originating user agent.
The EDIINT Features header indicates the capability of the user agent to support the listed feature with its trading partner without out of band communication and agreement.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
The EDIINT Features header can appear in the header section of an AS1, AS2, and AS3 message.
Its ABNF [RFC5234] syntax is listed below.
9 %d65 90 / ;
Feature names are case insensitive.
Implementation and Processing The EDIINT Features header field indicates the originating user agent is capable of supporting the features listed.
The EDIINT Features header field MUST be present in all messages transmitted by the user agent and not just messages that utilize the feature.
Upon examination of the EDIINT Features header field, the trading partner SHOULD assume the user agent is capable of receiving messages utilizing any of the features listed.
Features that utilize the EDIINT Features header field MUST be specified in RFCs.
These RFCs MUST describe the feature name that is listed in the header and the means by which it should be used.
EDIINT Applications AS2 and AS3 applications currently use a version header, AS2 Version and AS3 Version, respectively, to indicate functional support.
The EDIINT Features header field tremendously improves the purpose and function of the old version header.
However, to provide a connection from the old version header and the EDIINT Features header field, AS2 and AS3 applications that implement the EDIINT Features header field MUST use the version value of "1.2" to indicate the support of the EDIINT Features header field.
Also, since version "1.1" indicates the implementation supports compression [RFC5402] and
"1.2" builds upon "1.1", AS2 Version or AS3 Version of "1.2" MUST support compression regardless of whether it is mentioned as a feature in the EDIINT Features header field.
AS1 does not use a version header and one is not required for including the EDIINT Features header field.
The EDIINT Features header field is informational, and AS1, AS2, or AS3 trading partners who have not implemented it can safely ignore this header.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the following provisional header.
Kyle Meadors of Drummond Group (kyle@drummondgroup.com
) Specification document(s): this document Related information: This header will be used in conjunction with the EDIINT WG specifications
(AS2), RFC 3335 (AS1) and RFC 4823 (AS3).
Security Considerations Because headers are often un encrypted, it may be possible for the EDIINT Features header field to be altered.
Trading partners MAY consult out of band to confirm feature support.
