Abstract This document updates RFC 5575 ("Dissemination of Flow Specification Rules") to clarify the formatting of the BGP Flowspec Redirect Extended Community.
Introduction "Dissemination of Flow Specification Rules" [RFC5575], commonly known as BGP Flowspec, provided for a BGP Extended Community [RFC4360] that served to redirect traffic to a Virtual Routing and Forwarding (VRF) instance that matched the flow specification's Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI).
The redirect extended community allows the traffic to be : redirected to a VRF routing instance that lists the specified : route target in its import policy.
If several local instances : match this criteria, the choice between them is a local matter : (for example, the instance with the lowest Route Distinguisher : value can be elected).
This extended community uses the same : encoding as the Route Target extended community [RFC4360].
The IANA registry of BGP Extended Communities clearly identifies communities of specific formats.
For example, "Two octet AS Specific Extended Community" [RFC4360], "
Four octet AS Specific Extended Community" [RFC5668], and "IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community" [RFC4360].
Route Targets [RFC4360] identify this format in the high  order (Type) octet of the Extended Community and set the value of the low order (Sub Type)
The Value field of the Route Target Extended Community is intended to be interpreted in the context of its format.
Since the Redirect Extended Community only registered a single codepoint in IANA's BGP Extended Community registry, a common interpretation of the Redirect Extended Community's "6 byte Route Target" has been to look, at a receiving router, for a Route Target value that matches the Route Target value in the received Redirect Extended Community and import the advertised route to the corresponding VRF instance subject to the rules defined in [RFC5575].
However, because the Route Target format in the Redirect Extended Community is not clearly defined, the wrong match may occur.
This "value wildcard" matching behavior, which does not take into account the format of the Route Target defined for a local VRF and may result in the wrong matching decision,
does not match deployed implementations of BGP Flowspec.
Deployed implementations of BGP Flowspec solve this problem by defining different Redirect Extended Communities that are specific to the format of the Route Target value.
4 octet AS, 2 octet Value
It should be noted that the low order nibble of the Redirect's Type field corresponds to the Route Target Extended Community format field (Type).
(See Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 4 of [RFC4360] plus Section 2 of [RFC5668].)
The low order octet (Sub Type) of the Redirect Extended Community remains 0x08, in contrast to 0x02 for Route Targets.
The IANA registries for the BGP Extended Communities document [RFC7153] was written to update the previously mentioned IANA registries to better document BGP Extended Community formats.
The IANA Considerations section below further amends those registry updates in order to properly document the Flowspec redirect communities.
BGP Transitive Extended Community Types IANA has updated the "BGP Transitive Extended Community Types" registry as follows: 0x81  Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Part 2
(Sub Types are defined in the "Generic Transitive Experimental Extended Community Part 2 Sub Types" Registry)
Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Part 3
(Sub Types are defined in the "Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Part 3 Sub Types" Registry) 2.2.
Update to BGP Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended
Community Sub Types IANA has updated the "BGP Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Sub Types" registry as follows: 0x08 Flow spec redirect AS 2byte format
Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Part 2
Sub Types IANA has created the "Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Part 2 Sub Types" registry.
This has been created under the "Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Extended Communities" registry and contains the following note: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x81.
Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended
Community Part 2 Sub Types RANGE
IETF Review SUB TYPE VALUE
Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Part 3
Sub Types IANA has created the "Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Part 3 Sub Types" registry.
This registry has been created under the "Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Extended Communities" registry and contains the following note: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x82.
Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended
Community Part 2 Sub Types RANGE
This document introduces no additional security considerations than those already covered in [RFC5575].
It should be noted that if the wildcard behavior were actually implemented, this ambiguity may lead to the installation of Flowspec rules in an incorrect VRF and may lead to traffic to be incorrectly delivered.
