Abstract RFC 7020 provides information about the Internet Numbers Registry System and how it is used in the distribution of autonomous system (AS) numbers and globally unique unicast Internet Protocol (IP) address space.
This companion document identifies the IANA registries that are part of the Internet Numbers Registry System at this time.
In accordance with the IETF IANA Memorandum of Understanding [RFC2860], RFC 7020 [RFC7020] provides information about the Internet Numbers Registry System and how it is used in the distribution of autonomous system (AS) numbers and globally unique unicast Internet Protocol (IP) address space.
This companion document identifies the IANA registries that are part of the Internet Numbers Registry System at this time.
Three IANA registries are associated with the Internet Numbers Registry System: "Autonomous System (AS) Numbers", "IANA IPv4 Address Space Registry", and "IPv6 Global Unicast Address Assignments".
However, in each case, there are special purpose values, and those special purpose values are outside the Internet Numbers Registry System.
Autonomous System Numbers For historical reasons
, there are 16 bit AS numbers and 32 bit AS numbers.
However, the 16 bit AS numbers are really just zero through 65535 of the 32 bit AS number space.
The allocation and registration functions for all non reserved AS numbers are handled by the Internet Numbers Registry System in accordance with policies developed by the Regional Internet Registries (RIRs) in accordance with their processes.
Some special purpose AS numbers have been reserved.
Section 3 of this document establishes an IANA registry for special purpose AS Numbers that have already been reserved.
Future additions to this registry can be made through "IETF Review" as defined in [RFC5226].
Once a reservation is approved, it is recorded in the special purpose AS numbers registry with a reference to the IESG approved RFC that documents the reservation.
The allocation and registration functions for all non reserved, globally unique unicast IPv4 addresses are handled by the Internet Numbers Registry System in accordance with policies developed by the RIRs in accordance with their processes.
Reservations of special purpose IPv4 addresses can be found in the IANA registry [IANA IPv4 Reg].
Future additions to this registry can be made through "IETF Review" as defined in [RFC5226].
Once a reservation is approved, it is recorded in the special purpose IPv4 address registry with a reference to the IESG approved RFC that documents the reservation.
The vast bulk of the IPv6 address space (approximately 7/8ths of the whole address space) is reserved by the IETF [RFC4291], with the expectation that further assignment of globally unique unicast address space will be made from this reserved space in accordance with future needs.
The allocation and registration functions for all non reserved globally unique unicast IPv6 addresses are handled by the Internet Numbers Registry System in accordance with policies developed by the RIRs in accordance with their processes.
Reservations of special purpose IPv6 addresses can be found in the IANA registry [IANA IPv6 Reg].
Future additions to this registry can be made through "IETF Review" as defined in [RFC5226].
Once a reservation is approved, it is recorded in the special purpose IPv6 address registry with a reference to the IESG approved RFC that documents the reservation.
IANA Considerations IANA has created the "Special Purpose AS Numbers" registry.
Future additions to this registry can be made through "IETF Review" as defined in [RFC5226].
For documentation and sample code; reserved by [RFC5398] 64512 65534
For private use; reserved by [RFC6996] 65535
; reserved by [RFC5398] 4200000000 4294967294  For private use; reserved by [RFC6996] 4294967295
Reserved by [LAST AS RES] 4.
This document identifies the IANA registries that are part of the Internet Numbers Registry System at the time of publication.
It does not change the security posture of the Internet in any way.
Network operators should take care that special purpose numbers and addresses are used on the public Internet in a manner that is consistent with their reserved purpose.
