The National Software Works is developing a set of protocols for its use of the ARPA Network, other uses of these protocols is encouraged.
The procedure call protocol is intended to facilitate the sharing of resources in the network at the subroutine level.
The procedure call protocol will be used to split nls into a front end and back end components.
Procedure call protocol is also to be used in the nsw as the basis for communication between the works manager, the tool bearing hosts, and front desk procedure packages.
The documents cited below give a view of the Procedure Call Protocol and its use.
Documents: These documents are the second published version of the Procedure Call Protocol and NSW protocol PCP/NSW Version 2.
Version 2 is SUBSTANTIALLY different than Version 1; it and all intermediate, informally distributed PCP/NSW documents are obsoleted by this release.
The first document, PCP, is the place the interested ready should start.
It gives the required motivation for the use Protocol and states the substance of the Protocol proper.
The ready may then, if he chooses, read the next three documents: PIP, PSP, and PMP.
The latter has the most to offer the casual reader; the programmer faced with coding in the PCP environment should ready all three.
The next three documents PCPFMT, PCPHST, and PCPFRK are of interest only to the PCP implementer.
The next document HOST is a preliminary thought about how the NSW might use the standard HOST HOST protocol NCP.
The last four documents EXEC, FILE, BATCH, and LLDBUG describe procedure packages needed to carry out NSW functions, but such packages may well be useful in other contexts.
Version 2 consists of the following documents.
Each is available online in two forms: as an NLS file and as a formatted text file.
The journal number (e.g., 24459) refers to the former, of course and the pathname (e.g., [SRI ARI]
<NLS> PCP.TXT) to the latter, accessible via FTP
using USER ANONYMOUS and PASSWORD GUEST (no account required)
Hardcopy is being forwarded by US Mail to all those who have expressed an interest in PCP.
If you don't receive a copy and would like one of this and/or future releases, send a note to that effect to WHITE@SRI ARC: PCP (24459,)
" This document describes the virtual programming environment provided by PCP, and the inter process exchanges that implement it.
Pathname: [SRI ARC] <NLS>PCP.TXT PIP (24460,)
This document describes a packages that runs in the setting provided by PCP and that serves as a procedure  call level interface to PCP proper.
It includes procedures for calling, resuming, interrupting, and aborting remote procedures.
The PCP Support Packages" This document describes a package that runs in the setting provided by PCP and that augments PCP proper, largely in the area of data store manipulation.
It includes procedures for obtaining access to groups of remote procedures and data stores, manipulating remote data stores, and creating temporary ones.
PSP.TXT PMP (24462,) "The Process Management Package"
This document describes a package that runs in the setting provided by PCP and that provides the necessary tools for interconnecting two or more processes to form a multi process system (e.g., NSW).
It includes procedures for creating, deleting, logically and physically interconnecting processes, and for allocating and releasing processors.
"PCP Data Structure Formats" This document defines formats for PCP data structures, each of which is appropriate for one or more physical channel types.
PCP ARPANET Inter Host IPC Implementation
" This document defines an implementation, appropriate for mediating communication between Tenex folks, of the IPC primitives required by PCP.
Pathname: [SRI ARC] <NLS.PCPHST.TXT PCPFRK (24578,) "
IPC Implementation" This document defines an implementation, appropriate for mediating communication between processes on different hosts within the ARPANET, of the IPC primitives required by PCP.
Pathname: [SRI ARC] <NLS.PCPFRK.TXT HOST (24581,) "NSW Host Protocol
" This document describes the host level protocol used in the NSW.
The protocol is a slightly constrained version of the standard ARPANET host to host protocol.
The constraints affect the allocation, RFNM wait, and retransmission policies.
The Executive Package" This document describes a package that runs in the setting provided by PCP.
It includes procedures and data stores for user identification, accounting, and usage information.
"The File Package" This document describes a package that runs in the setting provided by PCP.
It includes procedures and data stores for opening, closing, and listing directories, for creating, deleting, and renaming files, and for transferring files and file elements between processes.
This document describes a package that runs in the setting provided by PCP.
It includes procedures for creating and deleting batch jobs, obtaining the status of a batch job, and communicating with the operator of a batch processing host.
This package is implemented at the host that provides the batch processing facility.
The Low Level Debug Package" This document describes a package that runs in the setting provided by PCP.
It includes procedures for a remote process to debug at the assembly language level, any process known to the local process.
The package contains procedures for manipulating and searching the process' address space, for manipulating and searching its symbol tables, and for setting and removing breakpoints from its address space.
Its data stores hold process characteristics and state information, and the contents of program symbol tables.
A demonstration of the National Software Works concept is to be performed in July 1975.
Recent developments: The set of documents cited above is available.
