Abstract This document defines a framework for Energy Management (EMAN) for devices and device components within, or connected to, communication networks.
The framework presents a physical reference model and information model.
The information model consists of an Energy Management Domain as a set of Energy Objects.
Each Energy Object can be attributed with identity, classification, and context.
Energy Objects can be monitored and controlled with respect to power, Power State, energy, demand, Power Attributes, and battery.
Additionally, the framework models relationships and capabilities between Energy Objects.
Introduction Network Management is often divided into the five main areas defined in the ISO Telecommunications Management Network model: Fault, Configuration, Accounting, Performance, and Security Management (FCAPS) [X.700].
Not covered by this traditional management model is Energy Management, which is rapidly becoming a critical area of concern worldwide, as seen in [ISO50001].
This document defines an Energy Management framework for devices within, or connected to, communication networks, per the Energy Management requirements specified in [RFC6988].
The devices, or the components of these devices (such as line cards, fans, and disks), can then be monitored and controlled.
Monitoring includes measuring power, energy, demand, and attributes of power.
Energy Control can be performed by setting a device's or component's state.
The devices monitored by this framework can be either of the following:  consumers of energy (such as routers and computer systems) and components of such devices (such as line cards, fans, and disks)  producers of energy (like an uninterruptible power supply or renewable energy system) and their associated components (such as battery cells, inverters, or photovoltaic panels)
This framework further describes how to identify, classify, and provide context for such devices.
While context information is not specific to Energy Management, some context attributes are specified in the framework, addressing the following use cases:  How important is a device in terms of its business impact?
How should devices be grouped for reporting and searching?
How should a device role be described?
Guidelines for using context for Energy Management are described.
The framework introduces the concept of a Power Interface that is analogous to a network interface.
A Power Interface is defined as an interconnection among devices where energy can be provided, received, or both.
The most basic example of Energy Management is a single device reporting information about itself.
In many cases, however, energy is not measured by the device itself but is measured upstream in the power distribution tree.
For example, a Power Distribution Unit (PDU) may measure the energy it supplies to attached devices and report this to an Energy Management System.
Therefore, devices often have relationships to other devices or components in the power network.
An Energy Management System (EnMS) generally requires an understanding of the power topology (who provides power to whom), the Metering topology (who meters whom), and the potential Aggregation (who aggregates values of others).
The relationships build on the Power Interface concept.
The different relationships among devices and components, as specified in this document, include power source, Metering, and Aggregation Relationships.
The framework does not cover non electrical equipment, nor does it cover energy procurement and manufacturing.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
In this document, these words will appear with the above interpretation only when in ALL CAPS.
Lowercase uses of these words are not to be interpreted as carrying the significance of RFC 2119 key words.
In this section, some terms have a NOTE that is not part of the definition itself but accounts for differences between terminologies of different standards organizations or further clarifies the definition.
The terms are listed in an order that aids in reading where terms may build off a previous term, as opposed to an alphabetical ordering.
Some terms that are common in electrical engineering or that describe common physical items use a lowercase notation.
Energy Management Energy Management is a set of functions for measuring, modeling, planning, and optimizing networks to ensure that the network and network attached devices use energy efficiently and appropriately for the nature of the application and the cost constraints of the organization.
Energy Management" refers to the activities, methods, procedures, and tools that pertain to measuring, modeling, planning, controlling, and optimizing the use of energy in networked systems [NMF].
Energy Management is a management domain that is congruent to any of the FCAPS areas of management in the ISO/OSI Network Management Model [TMN].
Energy Management for communication networks and attached devices is a subset or part of an organization's greater Energy Management Policies.
An Energy Management System is a combination of hardware and software used to administer a network, with the primary purpose of Energy Management.
An Energy Management System according to [ISO50001] (ISO EnMS) is a set of systems or procedures upon which organizations can develop and implement an energy policy, set targets and action plans, and take into account legal requirements related to energy use.
An ISO EnMS allows organizations to improve energy performance and demonstrate conformity to requirements, standards, and/or legal requirements.
Company A defines a set of policies and procedures indicating that there should exist multiple computerized systems that will poll energy measurements from their meters and pricing / source data from their local utility.
Company A specifies that their CFO (Chief Financial Officer) should collect information and summarize it quarterly to be sent to an accounting firm to produce carbon accounting reporting as required by their local government.
For the purposes of EMAN, the definition herein is the preferred meaning of an EnMS.
The definition from [ISO50001] can be referred to as an ISO Energy Management System (ISO EnMS).
Energy Monitoring Energy Monitoring is a part of Energy Management that deals with collecting or reading information from devices to aid in Energy Management.
Energy Control Energy Control is a part of Energy Management that deals with directing influence over devices.
This is a general term that includes materials, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, machines, etc., that are used as a part of, or in connection with, an electric installation.
non electrical equipment (mechanical equipment)
This is a general term that includes materials, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, machines, etc., that are used as a part of, or in connection with, non electrical power installations.
A device is a piece of electrical or non electrical equipment.
A component is a part of electrical or non electrical equipment (device).
A power inlet (or simply "inlet") is an interface at which a device or component receives energy from another device or component.
A power outlet (or simply "outlet") is an interface at which a device or component provides energy to another device or component.
energy Energy is that which does work or is capable of doing work.
As used by electric utilities, it is generally a reference to electrical energy and is measured in kilowatt hours (kWh).
Energy is the capacity of a system to produce external activity or perform work [ISO50001].
power Power is the time rate at which energy is emitted, transferred, or received; power is usually expressed in watts (joules per second).
demand Demand is the average value of power or a related quantity over a specified interval of time.
: Demand is expressed in kilowatts, kilovolt amperes, kilovars, or other suitable units.
While IEEE100 defines demand in kilo measurements, for EMAN we use watts with any suitable metric prefix.
provide energy A device (or component) "provides" energy to another device if there is an energy flow from this device to the other one.
A device (or component) "receives" energy from another device if there is an energy flow from the other device to this one.
A meter is a device intended to measure electrical energy by integrating power with respect to time.
A battery is one or more cells (consisting of an assembly of electrodes, electrolyte, container, terminals, and (usually) separators) that are a source and/or store of electric energy.
Power Interface A Power Interface is a power inlet, outlet, or both.
The Nameplate Power is the nominal power of a device as specified by the device manufacturer.
Power Attributes Power Attributes are measurements of the electrical current, voltage, phase, and frequencies at a given point in an electrical power system.
Power Attributes are not intended to provide any bounds or recommended range for the value.
They are simply the reading of the value associated with the attribute in question.
Power Quality "Power Quality" refers to characteristics of the electrical current, voltage, phase, and frequencies at a given point in an electric power system, evaluated against a set of reference technical parameters.
These parameters might, in some cases, relate to the compatibility between electricity supplied in an electric power system and the loads connected to that electric power system.
Electrical characteristics representing Power Quality information are typically required by customer facility Energy Management Systems.
Electrical characteristics are not intended to satisfy the detailed requirements of Power Quality monitoring.
Standards typically also give ranges of allowed values; the information attributes are the raw measurements, not the "yes/no" determination by the various standards.
Power State A Power State is a condition or mode of a device (or component) that broadly characterizes its capabilities, power, and responsiveness to input.
Power State Set A Power State Set is a collection of Power States that comprises a named or logical control grouping.
Target Devices With Energy Management, there exists a wide variety of devices that may be contained in the same deployment as a communication network but comprise a separate facility, home, or power distribution network.
Energy Management has special challenges because a power distribution network supplies energy to devices and components, while a separate communications network monitors and controls the power distribution network.
The target devices for Energy Management are all devices that can be monitored or controlled (directly or indirectly) by an Energy Management System (EnMS).
These target devices include, for example:  Simple electrical appliances and fixtures  Hosts, such as a PC, a server, or a printer  Switches, routers, base stations, and other network equipment such as middleboxes  Components within devices, e.g., a line card inside a switch  Batteries functioning as a device or component that is a store of energy  Devices or components that charge or produce energy, such as solar cells, charging stations, or generators  Power over Ethernet (PoE) endpoints  Power Distribution Units (PDUs)
Protocol gateway devices for Building Management Systems (BMS)
Sensor controllers with subtended sensors Target devices include devices that communicate via the Internet Protocol (IP) as well as devices using other means for communication.
The latter are managed through gateways or proxies that can communicate using IP.
The following reference model describes physical power topologies that exist in parallel with a communication topology.
While many more topologies can be created with a combination of devices, the following are some basic ones that show how Energy Management topologies differ from Network Management topologies.
>" is used to denote a transfer of information.
Areas Not Covered by the Framework
While this framework is intended as a framework for Energy Management in general, there are some areas that are not covered.
The primary focus of this framework is the management of electrical equipment.
Non electrical equipment, which is not covered in this framework, could nevertheless be modeled by providing interfaces that comply with the framework: for example, using the same units for power and energy.
Therefore, non electrical equipment that does not "convert to" or "present as" an entity equivalent to electrical equipment is not addressed.
Energy Procurement and Manufacturing While an EnMS may be a central point for corporate reporting, cost computation, environmental impact analysis, and regulatory compliance reporting, Energy Management in this framework excludes energy procurement and the environmental impact of energy use.
As such, the framework does not include:  Cost in currency or environmental units of manufacturing a device  Embedded carbon or environmental equivalences of a device  Cost in currency or environmental impact to dismantle or recycle a device  Supply chain analysis of energy sources for device deployment
Conversion of the usage or production of energy to units expressed from the source of that energy (such as the greenhouse gas emissions associated with the transfer of energy from a diesel source)
This section describes a conceptual model of information that can be used for Energy Management.
The classes and categories of attributes in the model are described, with a rationale for each.
This section describes an information model that addresses issues specific to Energy Management and complements existing Network Management models.
An information model for Energy Management will need to describe a means to monitor and control devices and components.
The model will also need to describe the relationships among, and connections between, devices and components.
This section defines a conceptual model for devices and components that is similar to the model used in Network Management: devices, components, and interfaces.
This section then defines the additional attributes specific to Energy Management for those entities that are not available in existing Network Management models.
For modeling the devices and components, this section describes three classes denoted by
a "(Class)" suffix: a Device (Class), a Component (Class), and a Power Interface (Class).
These classes are sub types of an abstract Energy Object (Class).
This section then describes the attributes of an Energy Object (Class) for identification, classification, context, control, power, and energy.
Since the interconnections between devices and components for Energy Management may have no relation to the interconnections for Network Management, the Energy Object (Classes) contain a separate Relationships (Class) as an attribute to model these types of interconnections.
The next sections describe each of the classes and categories of attributes in the information model.
Not all of the attributes are mandatory for implementations.
Specifications describing implementations of the information model in this framework need to be explicit about which are mandatory and which are optional to implement.
The formal definitions of the classes and attributes are specified in Section 7.
An Energy Object (Class) represents a piece of equipment that is part of, or attached to, a communications network that is monitored or controlled or that aids in the management of another device for Energy Management.
The Energy Object (Class) is an abstract class that contains the base attributes to represent a piece of equipment for Energy Management.
There are three types of Energy Object (Class): Device (Class), Component (Class), and Power Interface (Class).
The Device (Class) is a subclass of Energy Object (Class) that represents a physical piece of equipment.
A Device (Class) instance represents a device that is a consumer, producer, meter, distributor, or store of energy.
A Device (Class) instance may represent a physical device that contains other components.
The Component (Class) is a subclass of Energy Object (Class) that represents a part of a physical piece of equipment.
A Power Interface (Class) represents the interconnections (inlet, outlet) among devices or components where energy can be provided, received, or both.
The Power Interface (Class) is a subclass of Energy Object (Class) that represents a physical inlet or outlet.
There are some similarities between Power Interfaces and network interfaces.
A network interface can be set to different states, such as sending or receiving data on an attached line.
Similarly, a Power Interface can be receiving or providing energy.
A Power Interface (Class) instance can represent (physically) an AC power socket, an AC power cord attached to a device, or an 8P8C (RJ45) PoE socket, etc.
This section describes categories of attributes for an Energy Object (Class).
A Universally Unique Identifier (UUID)
[RFC4122] is used to uniquely and persistently identify an Energy Object.
Every Energy Object has an optional unique human readable printable name.
Possible naming conventions are textual DNS name, Media Access Control (MAC) address of the device, interface ifName, or a text string uniquely identifying the Energy Object.
As an example, in the case of IP phones, the Energy Object name can be the device's DNS name.
Additionally, an alternate key is provided to allow an Energy Object to be optionally linked with models in different systems.
In order to aid in reporting and in differentiation between Energy Objects, each object optionally contains information establishing its business, site, or organizational context within a deployment.
The Energy Object (Class) contains a category attribute that broadly describes how an instance is used in a deployment.
The category indicates whether the Energy Object is primarily functioning as a consumer, producer, meter, distributor, or store of energy.
Given the category and context of an object, an EnMS can summarize or analyze measurements for the site.
An Energy Object can provide an importance value in the range of 1 to 100 to help rank a device's use or relative value to the site.
The importance range is from 1 (least important) to 100 (most important).
The default importance value is 1.
For example, a typical office environment has several types of phones, which can be rated according to their business impact.
A public desk phone has a lower importance (for example, 10) than a business critical emergency phone (for example, 100).
As another example, a company can consider that a PC and a phone for a customer service engineer are more important than a PC and a phone for lobby use.
Although EnMS and administrators can establish their own ranking, the following example is a broad recommendation for commercial deployments [CISCO EW]: 90 to 100  Emergency response 80 to 90   Executive or business critical 70 to 79   General or average 60 to 69   Staff or support 40 to 59   Public or guest 1  to 39   Decorative or hospitality 6.3.4.
Context: Keywords The Energy Object (Class) contains an attribute with context keywords.
An Energy Object can provide a set of keywords that is a list of tags that can be used for grouping, summary reporting (within or between Energy Management Domains), and searching.
Potential examples are IT, lobby, HumanResources, Accounting, StoreRoom, CustomerSpace, router, phone, floor2, or SoftwareLab.
The specifics of how this tag is represented are left to the MIB module or other object definition documents to be based on this framework.
There is no default value for a keyword.
Multiple keywords can be assigned to an Energy Object.
Role The Energy Object (Class) contains a role attribute.
The "role description" string indicates the primary purpose the Energy Object serves in the deployment.
This could be a string representing the purpose the Energy Object fulfills in the deployment.
The specifics of how this tag is represented are left to the MIB module or other object definition documents to be based on this framework.
Administrators can define any naming scheme for the role.
As guidance, a two word role that combines the service the Energy Object provides, along with type, can be used [IPENERGY].
Example types of devices: Router, Switch, Light, Phone, WorkStation, Server, Display, Kiosk, HVAC.
The specifics of how this tag is represented are left to the MIB module or other object definition documents to be based on this framework.
Domain The Energy Object (Class) contains a string attribute to indicate membership in an Energy Management Domain.
An Energy Management Domain can be any collection of Energy Objects in a deployment, but it is recommended to map 1:1 with a metered or sub metered portion of the site.
In building management, a meter refers to the meter provided by the utility used for billing and measuring power to an entire building or unit within a building.
A sub meter refers to a customer  or user  installed meter that is not used by the utility to bill but is instead used to get measurements from portions of a building.
The specifics of how this tag is represented are left to the MIB module or other object definition documents to be based on this framework.
An Energy Object MUST be a member of a single Energy Management Domain; therefore, one attribute is provided.
The Energy Object (Class) contains attributes to describe power, energy, and demand measurements.
An analogy for understanding power versus energy measurements can be made to speed and distance in automobiles.
Just as a speedometer indicates the rate of change of distance (speed), a power measurement indicates the rate of transfer of energy.
The odometer in an automobile measures the cumulative distance traveled; similarly, an energy measurement indicates the accumulated energy transferred.
Demand measurements are averages of power measurements over time.
So, using the same analogy to an automobile: measuring the average vehicle speed over multiple intervals of time for a given distance traveled, demand is the average power measured over multiple time intervals for a given energy value.
Within this framework, energy will only be quantified in units of watt hours.
Physical devices measuring energy in other units must convert values to watt hours or be represented by Energy Objects that convert to watt hours.
Power The Energy Object (Class) contains a Nameplate Power Attribute that describes the nominal power as specified by the manufacturer of the device.
The EnMS can use the Nameplate Power for provisioning, capacity planning, and (potentially) billing.
The Energy Object (Class) has attributes that describe the present power information, along with how that measurement was obtained or derived (e.g., actual, estimated, or static).
A power measurement is qualified with the units, magnitude, and direction of power flow and is qualified as to the means by which the measurement was made.
Power measurement magnitude conforms to the [IEC61850] definition of unit multiplier for the SI (System International) units of measure.
Measured values are represented in SI units obtained by BaseValue   (10 ^ Scale).
For example, if current power usage of an Energy Object is 17, it could be 17 W, 17 mW, 17 kW, or 17 MW, depending on the value of the scaling factor.
17 W implies that BaseValue   17 and Scale   0, whereas 17 mW implies that
BaseValue   17 and ScaleFactor    3.
An Energy Object (Class) indicates how the power measurement was obtained with a caliber and accuracy attribute that indicates:  Whether the measurements were made at the device itself or at a remote source.
Description of the method that was used to measure the power and whether this method can distinguish actual or estimated values.
Accuracy for actual measured values.
Power Attributes The Energy Object (Class) contains an optional attribute that describes Power Attribute information reflecting the electrical characteristics of the measurement.
These Power Attributes adhere to the [IEC61850 7 2] standard for describing AC measurements.
Measurements: Energy The Energy Object (Class) contains optional attributes that represent the energy used, received, produced, and/or stored.
Typically, only devices or components that can measure actual power will have the ability to measure energy.
Demand The Energy Object (Class) contains optional attributes that represent demand information over time.
Typically, only devices or components that can report actual power are capable of measuring demand.
The Energy Object (Class) contains a Power State Set (Class) attribute that represents the set of Power States a device or component supports.
A Power State describes a condition or mode of a device or component.
While Power States are typically used for control, they may be used for monitoring only.
A device or component is expected to support at least one set of Power States consisting of at least two states: an on state and an off state.
There are many existing standards describing device and component Power States.
The framework supports modeling a mixed set of Power States defined in different standards.
A basic example is given by the three Power States defined in IEEE1621
[IEEE1621]: on, off, and sleep.
The Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF) standards organization [DMTF], Advanced Configuration and Power Interface (ACPI
) specification [ACPI], and Printer Working Group (PWG)
all define larger numbers of Power States.
The semantics of a Power State are specified by: a)
The functionality provided by an Energy Object in this state.
A limitation of the power that an Energy Object uses in this state.
A combination of a) and b).
The semantics of a Power State should be clearly defined.
Limitation (curtailment) of the power used by an Energy Object in a state may be specified by:  An absolute power value.
A percentage value of power relative to the Energy Object's Nameplate Power.
An indication of power relative to another Power State.
For example, specify that power in state A is less than in state
For supporting Power State management, an Energy Object provides statistics on Power States, including the time an Energy Object spent in a certain Power State and the number of times an Energy Object entered a Power State.
When requesting an Energy Object to enter a Power State, an indication of the Power State's name or number can be used.
Optionally, an absolute or percentage of Nameplate Power can be provided to allow the Energy Object to transition to a nearest or equivalent Power State.
When an Energy Object is set to a particular Power State, the represented device or component may be busy.
The Energy Object should set the desired Power State and then update the actual Power State when the device or component changes.
There are then two Power State (Class) control attributes: actual and requested.
The following sections describe well known Power States for devices and components that should be modeled in the information model.
There are several standards and implementations of Power State Sets.
The Energy Object (Class) supports modeling one or multiple Power State Set implementations on the device or component concurrently.
There are currently three Power State Sets specified by IANA: IEEE1621 (256)
The respective specific states related to each Power State Set are specified in the following sections.
The guidelines for the modification of Power State Sets are specified in the IANA Considerations section.
The IEEE1621 Power State Set [IEEE1621] consists of three rudimentary states: on, off, or sleep.
In IEEE1621, devices are limited to the three basic Power States   on (2), sleep (1), and off (0).
Any additional Power States are variants of one of the basic states, rather than a fourth state [IEEE1621].
The DMTF [DMTF] standards organization has defined a power profile standard based on the CIM (Common Information Model), which consists of 15 Power States.
The DMTF standard is targeted for hosts and computers.
Details of the semantics of each Power State within the DMTF Power State Set can be obtained from the DMTF Power State Management Profile specification [DMTF].
The DMTF power profile extends ACPI Power States.
The following table provides a mapping between DMTF and ACPI Power State Sets:
G2/S5 Off Soft Graceful (12)
G2/S5 Off Hard Graceful (13)
G2/S5 Power Cycle Off Hard Graceful (16)
The EMAN Power States are an expansion of the basic Power States as defined in [IEEE1621] plus the addition of the Power States defined in [ACPI] and [DMTF].
Therefore, in addition to the non operational states as defined in [ACPI] and [DMTF] standards, several intermediate operational states have been defined.
Physical devices and components are expected to support the EMAN Power State Set or to be modeled via an Energy Object the supports these states.
An Energy Object may implement fewer or more Power States than a particular EMAN Power State Set specifies.
In that case, the Energy Object implementation can determine its own mapping to the predefined EMAN Power States within the EMAN Power State Set.
There are twelve EMAN Power States that expand on [IEEE1621].
The expanded list of Power States is derived from [CISCO EW] and is divided into six operational states and six non operational states.
The lowest non operational state is 0, and the highest is 5.
Each non operational state corresponds to an [ACPI] Global and System state between G3 (hard off) and G1 (sleeping).
Each operational state represents a performance state and may be mapped to [ACPI]
states P0 (maximum performance power) through P5 (minimum performance and minimum power).
In each of the non operational states (from mechoff(0) to ready(5)), the Power State preceding it is expected to have a lower Power value and a longer delay in returning to an operational state: mechoff(0):
An off state where no Energy Object features are available.
The Energy Object is unavailable.
No energy is being consumed, and the power connector can be removed.
softoff(1): Similar to mechoff(0), but some components remain powered or receive trace power so that the Energy Object can be awakened from its off state.
In softoff(1), no context is saved, and the device typically requires a complete boot when awakened.
hibernate(2): No Energy Object features are available.
The Energy Object may be awakened without requiring a complete boot, but the time for availability is longer than sleep(3).
An example for state hibernate(2) is a save to disk state where DRAM context is not maintained.
Typically, energy consumption is zero or close to zero.
: No Energy Object features are available, except for out of band management, such as wake up mechanisms.
The time for availability is longer than standby(4).
An example for state sleep(3) is a save to RAM state, where DRAM context is maintained.
Typically, energy consumption is close to zero.
: No Energy Object features are available, except for out of band management, such as wake up mechanisms.
This mode is analogous to cold standby.
The time for availability is longer than ready(5).
For example, processor context may not be maintained.
Typically, energy consumption is close to zero.
ready(5): No Energy Object features are available, except for out of band management, such as wake up mechanisms.
This mode is analogous to hot standby.
The Energy Object can be quickly transitioned into an operational state.
For example, processors are not executing, but processor context is maintained.
: Indicates that some Energy Object features may not be available and the Energy Object has taken measures or selected options to use less energy than low(7).
: Indicates that some Energy Object features may not be available and the Energy Object has taken measures or selected options to use less energy than mediumMinus(8).
: Indicates that all Energy Object features are available but the Energy Object has taken measures or selected options to use less energy than medium(9).
: Indicates that all Energy Object features are available but the Energy Object has taken measures or selected options to use less energy than highMinus(10).
: Indicates that all Energy Object features are available and the Energy Object has taken measures or selected options to use less energy than high(11).
: Indicates that all Energy Object features are available and the Energy Object may use the maximum energy as indicated by the Nameplate Power.
A comparison of Power States from different Power State Sets can be seen in the following tables:
The Energy Object (Class) contains a set of Relationship (Class) attributes to model the relationships between devices and components.
Two Energy Objects can establish an Energy Object Relationship to model the deployment topology with respect to Energy Management.
Relationships are modeled with a Relationship (Class) that contains the UUID of the other participant in the relationship and a name that describes the type of relationship [CHEN].
The types of relationships are Power Source, Metering, and Aggregations.
A Power Source Relationship is a relationship where one Energy Object provides power to one or more Energy Objects.
The Power Source Relationship gives a view of the physical wiring topology   for example, a data center server receiving power from two specific Power Interfaces from two different PDUs.
Note: A Power Source Relationship may or may not change as the direction of power changes between two Energy Objects.
The relationship may remain to indicate that the change of power direction was unintended or an error condition.
A Metering Relationship is a relationship where one Energy Object measures power, energy, demand, or Power Attributes of one or more other Energy Objects.
The Metering Relationship gives the view of the Metering topology.
Physical meters can be placed anywhere in a power distribution tree.
For example, utility meters monitor and report accumulated power consumption of the entire building.
Logically, the Metering topology overlaps with the wiring topology, as meters are connected to the wiring topology.
A typical example is meters that clamp onto the existing wiring.
An Aggregation Relationship is a relationship where one Energy Object aggregates Energy Management information of one or more other Energy Objects.
The Aggregation Relationship gives a model of devices that may aggregate (sum, average, etc.)
The Aggregation Relationship is slightly different compared to the other relationships, as this refers more to a management function.
In some situations, it is not possible to discover the Energy Object Relationships, and an EnMS or administrator must set them.
Given that relationships can be assigned manually, the following sections describe guidelines for use.
Relationship Conventions and Guidelines This Energy Management framework does not impose many "MUST" rules related to Energy Object Relationships.
There are always corner cases that can be excluded by making stricter specifications for relationships.
However, the framework proposes a series of guidelines, indicated with "SHOULD" and "MAY".
Power Source Power Source Relationships are intended to identify the connections between Power Interfaces.
This is analogous to a Layer 2 connection in networking devices (a "one hop connection").
The preferred modeling would be for Power Interfaces to participate in Power Source Relationships.
In some cases, Energy Objects may not have the capability to model Power Interfaces.
Therefore, a Power Source Relationship can be established between two Energy Objects or two non connected Power Interfaces.
Strictly speaking, while components and Power Interfaces on the same Device do provide or receive energy from each other, the Power Source Relationship is intended to show energy transfer between Devices.
Therefore, the relationship is implied when on the same Device.
An Energy Object SHOULD NOT establish a Power Source Relationship with a component.
A Power Source Relationship SHOULD be established with the next known Power Interface in the wiring topology.
The next known Power Interface in the wiring topology would be the next device implementing the framework.
In some cases, the domain of devices under management may include some devices that do not implement the framework.
In these cases, the Power Source Relationship can be established with the next device in the topology that implements the framework and logically shows the Power Source of the device.
Transitive Power Source Relationships SHOULD NOT be established.
For example, if Energy Object A has a Power Source Relationship "Poweredby" with Energy Object B, and if Energy Object B has a Power Source Relationship "Poweredby" with Energy Object C, then Energy Object
A SHOULD NOT have a Power Source Relationship "Poweredby" with Energy Object C. 6.6.3.
Metering Relationship Metering Relationships are intended to show when one device acting as a meter is measuring the power or energy at a point in a power distribution system.
Since one point of a power distribution system may cover many devices within a wiring topology, this relationship type can be seen as a set.
Some devices may include hardware that can measure power for components, outlets, or the entire device.
For example, some PDUs may have the ability to measure power for each outlet and are commonly referred to as metered by outlet.
Others may be able to control power at each power outlet but can only measure power at the power inlet   commonly referred to as metered by device.
While the Metering Relationship could be used to represent a device as metered by outlet or metered by device, the Metering Relationship SHOULD be used to model the relationship between a meter and all devices covered by the meter downstream in the power distribution system.
In general:  A Metering Relationship MAY be established with any other Energy Object, component, or Power Interface.
Transitive Metering Relationships MAY be used.
When there is a series of meters for one Energy Object, the Energy Object MAY establish a Metering Relationship with one or more of the meters.
Aggregation Aggregation Relationships are intended to identify when one device is used to accumulate values from other devices.
Typically, this is for energy or power values among devices and not for components or Power Interfaces on the same device.
The intent of Aggregation Relationships is to indicate when one device is providing aggregate values for a set of other devices when it is not obvious from the power source or simple containment within a device.
Establishing Aggregation Relationships within the same device would make modeling more complex, and the aggregated values can be implied from the use of power inlets, outlet, and Energy Object values on the same device.
Since an EnMS is naturally a point of Aggregation, it is not necessary to model Aggregation for Energy Management Systems.
The Aggregation Relationship is intended for power and energy.
It MAY be used for Aggregation of other values from the information model, but the rules and logical ability to aggregate each attribute are out of scope for this document.
In general:  A Device SHOULD NOT establish an Aggregation Relationship with components contained on the same device.
A Device SHOULD NOT establish an Aggregation Relationship with the Power Interfaces contained on the same device.
A Device SHOULD NOT establish an Aggregation Relationship with an EnMS.
Aggregators SHOULD log or provide notification in the case of errors or missing values while performing Aggregation.
This framework for Energy Management is based on three relationship types: Aggregation, Metering, and Power Source.
This framework is defined with possible future extension of new Energy Object Relationships in mind.
For example:  Some Devices that may not be IP connected could be modeled with a proxy relationship to an Energy Object within the domain.
This type of proxy relationship is left for further development.
A Power Distribution Unit (PDU) that allows devices and components like outlets to be "ganged" together as a logical entity for simplified management purposes could be modeled with an extension called a "gang relationship", whose semantics would specify the Energy Objects' grouping.
This section presents an information model expression of the concepts in this framework as a reference for implementers.
The information model is implemented as MIB modules in the different related IETF EMAN documents.
However, other programming structures with different data models could be used as well.
Data modeling specifications of this information model may, where needed, specify which attributes are required or optional.
Syntax Unified Modeling Language (UML) Construct [ISO IEC 19501 2005]
CLASS name {member..} Subclass (Specialization)
CLASS subclass EXTENDS superclass {member..} Class Member (Attribute)
: uuid alternatekey : string //
DemandMeasurement // control powerControl [0
eoIfType : enum { inlet, outlet,
enum { producer, consumer, meter, distributor, store } powerInterfaces [0..
Component } CLASS Nameplate { nominalPower :
PowerAttribute } CLASS EnergyMeasurement EXTENDS Measurement { startTime : time units
long } CLASS TimedMeasurement EXTENDS
} CLASS DemandMeasurement EXTENDS Measurement {
TimedMeasurements } CLASS PowerStateSet {
long totalReactivePower : long totalApparentPower :
In this section, we give examples of how to use the EMAN information model to model physical topologies.
Where applicable, we show how the framework can be applied when devices can be modeled with Power Interfaces.
We also show how the framework can be applied when devices cannot be modeled with Power Interfaces but only monitored or controlled as a whole.
For instance, a PDU may only be able to measure power and energy for the entire unit without the ability to distinguish among the inlets or outlets.
The Power Source Relationship is used to model the interconnections between devices, components, and/or Power Interfaces to indicate the source of energy for a device.
In the following examples, we show variations on modeling the reference topologies using relationships.
Given for all cases: Device W:
A computer with one power supply.
Power Interface 1 is an inlet for Device W. Device X:
A computer with two power supplies.
Power Interface 1 and Power Interface 2 are both inlets for Device X. Device Y:
A PDU with multiple Power Interfaces numbered 0..10.
Power Interface 0 is an inlet, and Power Interfaces 1..
A PDU with multiple Power Interfaces numbered 0..10.
Power Interface 0 is an inlet, and Power Interfaces 1..
Case 1: Simple Device with one Source Physical Topology:  Device W inlet 1 is plugged into Device Y outlet 8.
Device W has an Energy Object representing the computer itself as well as one Power Interface defined as an inlet.
Device Y would have an Energy Object representing the PDU itself (the Device), with Power Interface 0 defined as an inlet and Power Interfaces 1..10 defined as outlets.
The interfaces of the devices would have a Power Source Relationship such that: Device W inlet 1 is powered by Device Y outlet 8.
Device W has an Energy Object representing the computer.
Device Y would have an Energy Object representing the PDU.
The devices would have a Power Source Relationship such that: Device W is powered by Device Y.
Device X inlet 1 is plugged into Device Y outlet 8.
Device X inlet 2 is plugged into Device Y outlet 9.
Device X has an Energy Object representing the computer itself.
It contains two Power Interfaces defined as inlets.
Device Y would have an Energy Object representing the PDU itself (the Device), with Power Interface 0 defined as an inlet and Power Interfaces 1..10 defined as outlets.
The interfaces of the devices would have a Power Source Relationship such that: Device X inlet 1 is powered by Device Y outlet 8.
Device X inlet 2 is powered by Device Y outlet 9.
Device X has an Energy Object representing the computer.
Device Y has an Energy Object representing the PDU.
The devices would have a Power Source Relationship such that: Device X is powered by Device Y.
Device X inlet 1 is plugged into Device Y outlet 8.
Device X inlet 2 is plugged into Device Z outlet 9.
Device X has an Energy Object representing the computer itself.
It contains two Power Interfaces defined as inlets.
Device Y would have an Energy Object representing the PDU itself (the Device), with Power Interface 0 defined as an inlet and Power Interfaces 1..10 defined as outlets.
Device Z would have an Energy Object representing the PDU itself (the Device), with Power Interface 0 defined as an inlet and Power Interfaces 1..10 defined as outlets.
The interfaces of the devices would have a Power Source Relationship such that: Device X inlet 1 is powered by Device Y outlet 8.
Device X inlet 2 is powered by Device Z outlet 9.
Device X has an Energy Object representing the computer.
Devices Y and Z would both have respective Energy Objects representing each entire PDU.
A meter in a power distribution system can logically measure the power or energy for all devices downstream from the meter in the power distribution system.
As such, a Metering Relationship can be seen as a relationship between a meter and all of the devices downstream from the meter.
We define in this case a Metering Relationship between a meter and devices downstream from the meter.
In cases where the Power Source topology cannot be discovered or derived from the information available in the Energy Management Domain, the Metering topology can be used to relate the upstream meter to the downstream devices in the absence of specific Power Source Relationships.
An analogy to communications networks would be modeling connections between servers (meters) and clients (devices) when the complete Layer 2 topology between the servers and clients is not known.
Some devices can act as Aggregation points for other devices.
For example, a PDU controller device may contain the summation of power and energy readings for many PDU devices.
The PDU controller will have aggregate values for power and energy for a group of PDU devices.
This Aggregation is independent of the physical power or communication topology.
The functions that the Aggregation point may perform include the calculation of values such as average, count, maximum, median, minimum, or the listing (collection) of the Aggregation values, etc.
Based on IETF experience gained on Aggregations [RFC7015], the Aggregation function in the EMAN framework is limited to the summation.
When Aggregation occurs across a set of entities, values to be aggregated may be missing for some entities.
The EMAN framework does not specify how these should be treated, as different implementations may have good reason to take different approaches.
One common treatment is to define the Aggregation as missing if any of the constituent elements are missing (useful to be most precise).
Another is to treat the missing value as zero (useful to have continuous data streams).
The specifications of Aggregation functions are out of the scope of the EMAN framework but must be clearly specified by the equipment vendor.
This Energy Management framework uses, as much as possible, existing standards, especially with respect to information modeling and data modeling [RFC3444].
The data model for power  and energy related objects is based on [IEC61850].
Specific examples include:  The scaling factor, which represents Energy Object usage magnitude, conforms to the [IEC61850] definition of unit multiplier for the SI (System International) units of measure.
The electrical characteristics are based on the ANSI and IEC Standards, which require that we use an accuracy class for power measurement.
ANSI and IEC define the following accuracy classes for power measurement: IEC 62053 22 and 60044 1 classes 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, and 3.
ANSI C12.20 classes 0.2 and 0.5.
The electrical characteristics and quality adhere closely to the [IEC61850 7 4] standard for describing AC measurements.
The Power State definitions are based on the DMTF Power State Profile and ACPI models, with operational state extensions.
Security Considerations Regarding the data attributes specified here, some or all may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
Reading or writing these attributes without proper protection such as encryption or access authorization will have negative effects on network capabilities.
Event logs for audit purposes on configuration and other changes should be generated according to current authorization, audit, and accounting principles to facilitate investigations (compromise or benign misconfigurations) or any reporting requirements.
The information and control capabilities specified in this framework could be exploited, to the detriment of a site or deployment.
Implementers of the framework SHOULD examine and mitigate security threats with respect to these new capabilities. "
User based Security Model (USM) for version 3 of the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv3)"
[RFC3414] presents a good description of threats and mitigations for SNMPv3 that can be used as a guide for implementations of this framework using other protocols.
Security Considerations for SNMP Readable objects in MIB modules (i.e., objects with a MAX ACCESS other than not accessible) may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
It is important to control GET and/or NOTIFY access to these objects and possibly to encrypt the values of these objects when sending them over the network via SNMP.
The support for SET operations in a non secure environment without proper protection can have a negative effect on network operations.
For example:  Unauthorized changes to the Energy Management Domain or business context of a device will result in misreporting or interruption of power.
Unauthorized changes to a Power State will disrupt the power settings of the different devices and therefore the state of functionality of the respective devices.
Unauthorized changes to the demand history will disrupt proper accounting of energy usage.
With respect to data transport, SNMP versions prior to SNMPv3 did not include adequate security.
Even if the network itself is secure (for example, by using IPsec), there is still no secure control over who on the secure network is allowed to access and
the objects in these MIB modules.
It is recommended that implementers consider the security features as provided by the SNMPv3 framework (see [RFC3411]), including full support for the SNMPv3 cryptographic mechanisms (for authentication and confidentiality).
Further, deployment of SNMP versions prior to SNMPv3 is not recommended.
Instead, it is recommended to deploy SNMPv3 and to enable cryptographic security.
It is then a customer/operator responsibility to ensure that the SNMP entity giving access to an instance of these MIB modules is properly configured to give access to the objects only to those principals (users) that have legitimate rights to GET or SET (change/create/delete) them.
IANA Registration of New Power State Sets
This document specifies an initial set of Power State Sets.
The list of these Power State Sets with their numeric identifiers is given in Section 6.
IANA maintains the lists of Power State Sets.
New assignments for a Power State Set are administered by IANA through Expert Review [RFC5226], i.e., review by one of a group of experts designated by an IETF Area Director.
The group of experts must check the requested state for completeness and accuracy of the description.
A pure vendor specific implementation of a Power State Set shall not be adopted, since it would lead to proliferation of Power State Sets.
Power States in a Power State Set are limited to 255 distinct values.
A new Power State Set must be assigned the next available numeric identifier that is a multiple of 256.
IANA Registration of the IEEE1621 Power State Set
This document specifies a set of values for the IEEE1621 Power State Set [IEEE1621].
The list of these values with their identifiers is given in Section 6.5.2.
IANA created a new registry for IEEE1621 Power State Set identifiers and filled it with the initial list of identifiers.
New assignments (or, potentially, deprecation) for the IEEE1621 Power State Set are administered by IANA through Expert Review [RFC5226].
IANA Registration of the DMTF Power State Set
This document specifies a set of values for the DMTF Power State Set [DMTF].
The list of these values with their identifiers is given in Section 6.5.3.
IANA has created a new registry for DMTF Power State Set identifiers and filled it with the initial list of identifiers.
New assignments (or, potentially, deprecation) for the DMTF Power State Set are administered by IANA through Expert Review [RFC5226].
The group of experts must check for conformance with the DMTF standard [DMTF] in addition to checking for completeness and accuracy of the description.
IANA Registration of the EMAN Power State Set
This document specifies a set of values for the EMAN Power State Set.
The list of these values with their identifiers is given in Section 6.5.4.
IANA has created a new registry for EMAN Power State Set identifiers and filled it with the initial list of identifiers.
New assignments (or, potentially, deprecation) for the EMAN Power State Set are administered by IANA through Expert Review [RFC5226].
Updating the Registration of Existing Power State Sets With the evolution of standards, over time, it may be important to deprecate some of the existing Power State Sets, or to add or deprecate some Power States within a Power State Set.
The registrant shall post an Internet Draft with the clear specification on deprecation of Power State Sets or Power States registered with IANA.
The deprecation or addition shall be administered by IANA through Expert Review [RFC5226], i.e., review by one of a group of experts designated by an IETF Area Director.
The process should also allow for a mechanism for cases where others have significant objections to claims regarding the deprecation of a registration.
The present demand measurement for the Energy Object r  powerControl
A list of Power States Sets
Broadly indicates whether the Device is a producer, consumer, meter, distributor, or store of energy r  powerInterfaces
A list of PowerInterfaces [0
A list of components [0
Broadly indicates whether the component is a producer, consumer, meter, distributor, or store of energy r  powerInterfaces
PowerInterface  A list of PowerInterfaces [0
A list of components contained [0
An [RFC3986] URI that links to manufacturer information about the nominal power of a device F. Relationship (Class):
A description of the relationship, indicating meters, meteredby, powers, poweredby, aggregates, or aggregatedby rw relationshipObject
[RFC6933] entPhysicalUUID that indicates the other participating Energy Object in the relationship G. Measurement (Class): r  multiplier  Enumeration
The magnitude of the Measurement in the range  24..
actual, estimated, or static r  accuracy    Enumeration    Specifies the accuracy of the measurement, if applicable, as 0..10000, indicating hundreds of percent H. PowerMeasurement (Class) inherits from Measurement
A measurement value of power r units
"Watts" r powerAttribute PowerAttribute   Measurement of the electrical current   voltage, phase,
The units of measure for the energy   kilowatt hours r provided
A measurement of energy stored J. TimedMeasurement (Class) inherits from Measurement:
A maximum value measured since a previous timestamp K. TimeInterval (Class):
A magnitude of time, expressed as seconds with an SI prefix (milliseconds, etc.)
L. DemandMeasurement (Class) inherits from Measurement: rw intervalLength
The length of time over which to compute average energy rw intervals
The number of intervals that can be measured
The mode of interval measurement   periodic, sliding, or total rw intervalWindow  TimeInterval
active or inactive r  measurements
A collection of TimedMeasurements [0
The current operational Power State rw adminState
Indicates the time of the desired Power State N. PowerState (Class):
A calculated value for the current Total Harmonic Distortion (THD).
A measured value of the voltage and current, which determines the apparent power as the vector sum of real and reactive power [IEC61850 7 4] 'TotVA' r totalPowerFactor
A measured value of the ratio of the real power flowing to the load versus the apparent power [IEC61850 7 4] 'TotPF' Q. DelPhase (Class) inherits from ACQuality:
A calculated value for the voltage Total Harmonic Distortion (THD) for phase to next phase.
The method of calculation is not specified [IEC61850 7 4] 'ThdPPV' R. WYEPhase (Class) inherits from ACQuality:
A calculated value for the current Total Harmonic Distortion (THD).
A calculated value of the voltage THD for phase to neutral [IEC61850 7 4] 'ThdPhV' r avgCurrent
A measured value of phase currents [IEC61850 7 4]
