This memo describes a simple method of encoding PSTN addresses of facsimile devices in the local part of Internet email addresses.
As with all Internet mail addresses, the left hand side (local  part) of an address generated according to this specification, is not to be interpreted except by the MTA that is named on the right hand side (domain).
Since the very first e mail to fax gateway objects appeared, a number of different methods to specify a fax address as an e mail address have been used by implementors.
Two major objectives for this were enable an e mail user to send faxes from his/her e mail interface; enable some kind of "fax over e mail service" transport, to reduce the costs of fax transmissions, and use the existing e mail infrastructure.
This memo describes the MINIMAL addressing method and standard extensions to encode FAX addresses in e mail addresses, as required in reference [13].
The opposite problem, i.e. to allow a traditional numeric only fax device user to access the e mail transport service, is not discussed here.
All implementations supporting this FAX over e mail address format MUST support as a minimum the specification described in this document.
The generic complex case of converting the whole PSTN addressing in e mail is out of scope in this minimal specification: there is some work in progress in the field, where also a number of standard optional extensions are being defined.
In this document the formal definitions are described using ABNF syntax, as defined into [7].
We will also use some of the "CORE DEFINITIONS" defined in "APPENDIX A CORE" of that document.
The exact meaning of the capitalised words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
The "service selector" defined in section 2 of reference [13] for the fax service is: service selector
"FAX" The minimal addressing for the fax service also requires support for a "qualif type1" element (see section 2 of reference [13]).
"FAX " global phone Note:
See section 4.1 in case multiple sub addr per fax mbox need to be specified.
The use of other dialling schemas for PSTN numbers (like private numbering plans or local dialling conventions) is also allowed.
However, this does not preclude nor remove the minimal compulsory requirement to support the "global phone" syntax as defined above.
The specification of these different dialling schemas is out of scope for this minimal specification.
User specification of PSTN e mail addresses will be facilitated if they can insert these separators between dial elements like digits etc.
For this reason we allow them in the syntax the written sep element.
Use of the written sep elements is allowed, but not recommended.
Any occurences of written sep elements in a pstn mbox MUST be ignored by all conformant implementations.
User Agents SHOULD remove written sep elements before submitting messages to the Message Transport System.
Some examples of a minimal "fax address" FAX  3940226338 FAX  12027653000/T33S 1387 FAX  33 1 88335215 3.
The e mail address of the I fax device: mta
"I fax device" has an e mail address, or to be more exact, a name which enables a mail system to identify it on the e mail global system.
We will call this mta
domain For "domain" strings used in SMTP transmissions
, the string MUST conform to the requirements of that standard's <domain> specifications [1], [3].
For "domain" strings used in message content headers, the string MUST conform to the requirements of the relevant standards [2], [3].
Note: in both cases, the standards permit use of "domain names" or "domain literals" in addresses.
The complete structure used to transfer a minimal FAX address over the Internet e mail transport system is called "fax email".
This object is an e mail address which conforms to RFC822 [2] and RFC1123 [3]
"addr spec" syntax, with some extra structure which allows the FAX number to be identified.
Implementations MUST accept the optional slashes but SHOULD NOT generate them.
Gateways are allowed to strip them off when converting to Internet mail addressing.
It is essential to remind that "fax address" element MUST strictly follow the "quoting rules" spcified in the relevant standards [2], [3] 4.1 Multiple subaddresses
In case a particular service requires multiple T.33 subaddresses, and these subaddresses need to be given on the same "fax mbox", multiple "fax email" elements will be used.
Implementors' note: The UA could accept multiple subaddress elements for the same global phone, but it must generate multiple "fax mbox" elements when passing the message to the MTA.
Some examples of minimal "fax email" FAX  3940226338@faxworld.org FAX  12027653000/T33S 1387@faxworld.org /FAX
This proposal creates a minimal standard encoding for FAX addresses within the global e mail transport system.
The proposal requires no changes to existing e mail software.
This document specifies a means by which FAX addresses can be encoded into e mail addresses.
As routing of e mail messages is determined by Domain Name System (DNS) information, a successful attack on this service could force the mail path via some particular gateway or message transfer agent where mail security can be affected by compromised software.
There are several means by which an attacker might be able to deliver incorrect mail routing information to a client.
These include: (a) compromise of a DNS server, (b) generating a counterfeit response to a client's DNS query, (c)
returning incorrect "additional information" in response to an unrelated query.
Clients SHOULD ensure that mail routing is based only on authoritative answers.
Once DNS Security mechanisms [5] become more widely deployed, clients SHOULD employ those mechanisms to verify the authenticity and integrity of mail routing records.
Author's Address Claudio Allocchio Sincrotrone Trieste SS 14 Km 163.5 Basovizza
I 34012 Trieste Italy RFC822:
garr;P Trieste;O Elettra; S Allocchio;G Claudio; Phone:   39
