Abstract Procedures and protocol mechanisms to enable efficient and accurate measurement of packet loss, delay, and throughput in MPLS networks are defined in RFC 6374.
The MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP) is the set of MPLS protocol functions applicable to the construction and operation of packet  switched transport networks.
This document describes a profile of the general MPLS loss, delay, and throughput measurement techniques that suffices to meet the specific requirements of MPLS TP.
This document is a product of a joint Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) / International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU T) effort to include an MPLS Transport Profile within the IETF MPLS and Pseudowire Emulation Edge
to Edge (PWE3) architectures to support the capabilities and functionalities of a packet transport network as defined by the ITU T. 1.
Introduction Procedures for the measurement of packet loss, delay, and throughput in MPLS networks are defined in [RFC6374].
This document describes a profile, i.e., a simplified subset, of these procedures that suffices to meet the specific requirements of MPLS based transport networks [RFC5921] as defined in [RFC5860].
This profile is presented for the convenience of implementors who are concerned exclusively with the transport network context.
The use of the profile specified in this document is purely optional.
Implementors wishing to provide enhanced functionality that is within the scope of [RFC6374] but outside the scope of this profile may do so, whether or not the implementation is restricted to the transport network context.
The assumption of this profile is that the devices involved in a measurement operation are configured for measurement by a means external to the measurement protocols themselves, for example, via a Network Management System (NMS) or separate configuration protocol.
The manageability considerations in [RFC6374] apply, and further information on MPLS TP network management can be found in [RFC5950].
This document is a product of a joint Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) / International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU T) effort to include an MPLS Transport Profile within the IETF MPLS and Pseudowire Emulation Edge
to Edge (PWE3) architectures to support the capabilities and functionalities of a packet transport network as defined by the ITU T. 2.
The measurement considerations discussed in Section 2.9 of [RFC6374] apply also in the context of MPLS TP, except for the following, which pertain to topologies excluded from MPLS TP:
Equal Cost Multipath considerations (Section 2.9.4 of [RFC6374])
Considerations for direct Loss Measurement (LM) in the presence of Label Switched Paths constructed via the Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) or utilizing Penultimate Hop Popping (Section 2.9.8 of [RFC6374]
Packet Loss Measurement (LM) Profile
When an LM session is externally configured, the values of several protocol parameters can be fixed in advance at the endpoints involved in the session, so that negotiation of these parameters is not required.
These parameters, and their default values as specified by this profile, are as follows:
Response Requested Byte/packet Count (B)
A simple implementation may assume that external configuration will ensure that both ends of the communication are using the default values for these parameters.
However, implementations are strongly advised to validate the values of these parameters in received messages so that configuration inconsistencies can be detected and reported.
LM message rates (and test message rates, when inferred LM is used) should be configurable by the network operator on a per channel basis.
The following intervals should be supported:
10 milliseconds, 100 milliseconds, 1 second, 10 seconds, 1 minute 4.
When a DM session is externally configured, the values of several protocol parameters can be fixed in advance at the endpoints involved in the session, so that negotiation of these parameters is not required.
These parameters, and their default values as specified by this profile, are as follows:
A simple implementation may assume that external configuration will ensure that both ends of the communication are using the default values for these parameters.
However, implementations are strongly advised to validate the values of these parameters in received messages so that configuration inconsistencies can be detected and reported.
DM message rates should be configurable by the network operator on a per channel basis.
The following message intervals should be supported: 1 second, 10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes.
This document delineates a subset of the procedures specified in [RFC6374], and as such introduces no new security considerations in itself.
The security considerations discussed in [RFC6374] also apply to the profile presented in this document.
General considerations for MPLS TP network security can be found in [SECURITY FRAMEWORK].
