Abstract This document creates additional Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Resource Priority namespaces to meet the requirements of the US Defense Information Systems Agency, and places these namespaces in the IANA registry.
The US Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) is rolling out their Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) based architecture at this time.
This network will require more Resource Priority namespaces than were defined, and IANA registered, in RFC 4412
The purpose of this document is to define these additional namespaces.
Each will be preemptive in nature, as defined in RFC 4412, and will have the same 10 priority values.
DISA has a requirement to be able to assign different Resource  Priority namespaces to differing groups of differing sizes throughout their networks.
Examples of this may be namespaces as large as each branch of service (Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Coast Guard) namespaces for some departments within the government (for example, Homeland Security) namespaces that are temporary assignments to individual units of varying sizes (from battle groups to patrol groups or platoons)
These temporary assignments might be combinations of smaller units involving several branches of service operating as one unit (say, one task force, which is separate than the branch of service), or a single commando unit requiring special treatment for a short period of time, making it appear separate from the branch of service they are from.
Providing DISA with a pool of namespaces for fine grained assignment(s) allows them the flexibility they need for their mission requirements.
One can imagine due to their sheer size and separation of purpose, they can easily utilize a significant number of namespaces within their networks.
This is the reason for the assignment of so many new namespaces, which seems to deviate from guidance in RFC 4412 to have as few namespaces as possible.
This document makes no changes to SIP, it just adds IANA registered namespaces for SIP's use within the Resource Priority header framework.
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
New SIP Resource Priority Namespaces Created
The following 40 SIP namespaces are created by this document:
Each namespace listed above is wholly different.
However, according to the rules within Section 8 of RFC 4412, one or more sets can be treated as if they are the same when they are configured as an aggregated grouping of namespaces.
These aggregates of two or more namespaces, that are to be considered equivalent during treatment, can be a set of any IANA registered namespaces, not just adjacent (i.e., consecutive) namespaces.
Each namespace listed above will have the same 10 priority levels:
According to the rules established in RFC 4412
[RFC4412], priority  values have a relative order for preferential treatment, unless one or more consecutive groups of priority values are to be considered equivalent (i.e., first received, first treated).
Other namespace definitions in the future could change this.
As stated in Section 9 of RFC 4412
[RFC4412] an IANA registered namespace SHOULD NOT change the number, and MUST NOT change the relative priority order, of its assigned priority values.
IANA Considerations Abiding by the rules established within RFC 4412
, this is a Standards Track document registering new namespaces, their associated priority values, and intended algorithms.
IANA Resource Priority Namespace Registration
Within the "Resource Priority Namespaces" registry in the sip  parameters section of IANA, the following table lists the new namespaces registered by this document.
IANA Priority Value Registrations Within the "Resource Priority Priority values" registry in the sip parameters section of IANA
, the list of priority values for each of the 40 newly created namespaces from Section 3.1 of this document, prioritized least to greatest, is registered by the following (replicated similar to the following format):
Priority Values (least to greatest): "0", "1", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7", "8", "9" 4.
This document has the same Security Considerations as RFC 4412.
