This memo is an introductory guide to many of the most commonly  available TCP/IP and Internet tools and utilities.
It also describes discussion lists accessible from the Internet, ways to obtain Internet and TCP/IP documents, and some resources that help users weave their way through the Internet.
This memo is an introductory guide to some of the most commonly  available TCP/IP and Internet tools and utilities that allow users to access the wide variety of information on the network, from determining if a particular host is up to viewing a multimedia thesis on foreign policy.
It also describes discussion lists accessible from the Internet, ways to obtain Internet and TCP/IP documents, and some resources that help users weave their way through the Internet.
This memo may be used as a tutorial for individual self learning, a step  by step laboratory manual for a course, or as the basis for a site's users manual.
It is intended as a basic guide only and will refer to other sources for more detailed information.
The following sections provide descriptions and detailed examples of several TCP/IP utilities and applications, including the reproduction of actual sessions using these utilities (with some extraneous information removed).
Each section describes a single TCP/IP based tool, it's application, and, in some cases, how it works.
The text description is usually followed by an actual sample session.
The sample dialogues shown below were obtained from a variety of software and hardware systems, including AIX running on an IBM RS/6000, Linux on an Intel 486, Multinet TCP/IP over VMS on a VAX, and FTP Software's OnNet (formerly PC/TCP) running on a DOS/Windows PC.
While the examples below can be used as a guide to using and learning about the capabilities of TCP/IP tools, the reader should understand that not all of these utilities may be found at all TCP/IP hosts nor in all commercial software packages.
Furthermore, the user interface for different packages will be different and the actual command line may appear differently than shown here; this will be particularly true for graphical user interfaces running over Windows, X Windows, OS/2, or Macintosh systems.
Windows based sessions are not shown in this RFC because of the desire to have a text version of this document; in addition, most GUI based TCP/IP packages obscure some of the detail that is essential for understanding what is really happening when you click on a button or drag a file.
The Internet has many exciting things to offer but standardized interfaces to the protocols is not yet one of them!
This guide will not provide any detail or motivation about the Internet Protocol Suite; more information about the TCP/IP protocols and related issues may be found in RFC 1180 [29], Comer [6], Feit [7], Kessler [14], and Stevens [30].
Finding Information About Internet Hosts and Domains
There are several tools that let you learn information about Internet hosts and domains.
These tools provide the ability for an application or a user to perform host name/address reconciliation (NSLOOKUP), determine whether another host is up and available (PING), learn about another host's users (Finger), and learn the route that packets will take to another host (Traceroute).
NSLOOKUP NSLOOKUP is the name server lookup program that comes with many TCP/IP software packages.
A user can use NSLOOKUP to examine entries in the Domain Name System (DNS) database that pertain to a particular host or domain; one common use is to determine a host system's IP address from its name or the host's name from its IP address.
The general form of the command to make a single query is: nslookup [IP address host name]
If the program is started without any parameters, the user will be prompted for input; the user can enter either an IP address or host name at that time, and the program will respond with the name and address of the default name sever, the name server actually used to resolve each request, and the IP address and host name that was queried.
Exit is used to quit the NSLOOKUP application.
Three simple queries are shown in the example below: 1 Requests the address of the host named www.hill.com, the World Wide Web server at Hill Associates.
As it turns out, this is not the true name of the host, but an alias.
The full name of the host and the IP address are listed by NSLOOKUP.
2 Requests the address of host syrup.hill.com, which is the same host as in the first query.
Note that NSLOOKUP provides a "non  authoritative" answer.
Since NSLOOKUP just queried this same address, the information is still in its cache memory.
Rather than send additional messages to the name server, the answer is one that it remembers from before; the server didn't look up the information again, however, so it is not guaranteed to still be accurate (because the information might have changed within the last few milliseconds!).
3 Requests the name of the host with the given IP address.
The result points to the Internet gateway to Australia, munnari.oz.au.
One additional query is shown in the dialogue below.
NSLOOKUP examines information that is stored by the DNS.
The default NSLOOKUP queries examine basic address records (called "A records") to reconcile the host name and IP address, although other information is also available.
In the final query below, for example, the user wants to know where electronic mail addressed to the hill.com domain actually gets delivered, since hill.com is not the true name of an actual host.
This is accomplished by changing the query type to look for mail exchange (MX) records by issuing a set type command (which must be in lower case).
The query shows that mail addressed to hill.com is actually sent to a mail server called mail.hill.com.
If that system is not available, mail delivery will be attempted to first mailme.hill.com and then to netcomsv.netcom.com; the order of these attempts is controlled by the "preference" value.
This query also returns the name of the domain's name servers and all associated IP addresses.
The DNS is beyond the scope of this introduction, although more information about the concepts and structure of the DNS can be found in STD 13/RFC 1034 [19], RFC 1591 [21], and Kessler [16].
The help command can be issued at the program prompt for information about NSLOOKUP's more advanced commands.
There are other tools that might be available on your system or with your software for examining the DNS.
Alternatives to NSLOOKUP include HOST and DIG.
SMCVAX$ nslookup Default Server:  ns1.ner.bbnplanet.net
Ping Ping, reportedly an acronym for the Packet Internetwork Groper, is one of the most widely available tools bundled with TCP/IP software packages.
Ping uses a series of Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP)
[22] Echo messages to determine if a remote host is active or inactive, and to determine the round trip delay in communicating with it.
A common form of the Ping command, showing some of the more commonly available options that are of use to general users, is: ping [ q] [ v] [ R] [ c Count]
c Count    Specifies the number of Echo Requests to be sent before concluding test (default is to run until interrupted with a control C)
Indicates the number of seconds to wait between sending each packet (default   1)  s
PacketSize    Specifies the number of data bytes to be sent; the total ICMP packet size will be PacketSize 8 bytes due to the ICMP header (default   56, or a 64 byte packet)
Host   IP address or host name of target system
In the first example below, the user pings the host thumper.bellcore.com, requesting that 6 ( c) messages be sent, each containing 64 bytes ( s) of user data.
The display shows the round  trip delay of each Echo message returned to the sending host; at the end of the test, summary statistics are displayed.
In the second example, the user pings the host smcvax.smcvt.edu, requesting that 10 messages be sent in quite mode ( q).
In this case, a summary is printed at the conclusion of the test and individual responses are not listed.
Older versions of the Ping command, which are still available on some systems, had the following general format: ping [ s] {IP address host name} [PacketSize]
In this form, the optional " s" string tells the system to continually send an ICMP Echo message every second; the optional PacketSize parameter specifies the number of bytes in the Echo message (the message will contain PacketSize 8 bytes of data; the default is 56 bytes of data and a 64 byte message); and the optional Count parameter indicates the number of Echo messages to send before concluding the test (the default is to run the test continuously until interrupted).
syrup:/home$ ping  c 6  s 64 thumper.bellcore.com PING thumper.bellcore.com (128.96.41.1): 64 data bytes 72 bytes from 128.96.41.1:
icmp seq 0 ttl 240 time 641.8 ms 72 bytes from 128.96.41.1:
icmp seq 2 ttl 240 time
1072.7 ms 72 bytes from 128.96.41.1:
icmp seq 3 ttl 240 time
1447.4 ms 72 bytes from 128.96.41.1:
icmp seq 4 ttl 240 time 758.5 ms 72 bytes from 128.96.41.1:
icmp seq 5 ttl 240 time
482.1 ms   thumper.bellcore.com ping statistics   6 packets transmitted, 5 packets received, 16% packet loss round trip min/avg/max
ms   syrup:/home$ ping  q  c
10 smcvax.smcvt.edu PING smcvax.smcvt.edu (192.80.64.1): 56 data bytes
10 packets transmitted, 8 packets received, 20% packet loss round trip
The Finger program may be used to find out who is logged in on another system or to find out detailed information about a specific user.
This command has also introduced a brand new verb; fingering someone on the Internet is not necessarily a rude thing to do!
The Finger User Information Protocol is described in RFC 1288 [32].
The most general format of the Finger command is: finger [username]@host name
The first example below shows the result of fingering an individual user at a remote system.
The first line of the response shows the username, the user's real name, their process identifier, application, and terminal port number.
Additional information may be supplied at the option of the user in "plan" and/or "project" files that they supply; these files are often named PLAN.TXT or PROJECT.TXT, respectively, and reside in a user's root directory (or somewhere in an appropriate search path).
The second example shows the result of fingering a remote system.
This lists all of the processes currently running at the fingered system or other information, depending upon how the remote system's administrator set up the system to respond to the Finger command.
Fri 16 Sep 1996 3:47PM EDT Plan:   Gary C. Kessler Adjunct Faculty Member, Graduate College INTERNET:  kumquat@smcvt.edu
Tuesday, September 17, 1996 10:12AM EDT
30 09:40:18 5 1 Jobs on SMCVAX
Traceroute Traceroute is another common TCP/IP tool, this one allowing users to learn about the route that packets take from their local host to a remote host.
Although used often by network and system managers as a simple, yet powerful, debugging tool, traceroute can be used by end users to learn something about the ever changing structure of the Internet.
q   is the number of UDP packets that will be sent with each time to live setting (default   3)
w   is the amount of time, in seconds, to wait for an answer from a particular router before giving up (default  5)
p   is the invalid port address at the remote host (default   33434)
The Traceroute example below shows the route between a host at St. Michael's College (domain smcvt.edu) and a host at Hill Associates (www.hill.com), both located in Colchester, VT but served by different Internet service providers (ISP).
St. Michael's College is connected to the Internet via BBN Planet; since the mid 1980s, BBN operated the NSF's regional ISP, called the New England Academic and Research Network (NEARNET), which was renamed in 1994.
The first hop, then, goes to St. Mike's BBN Planet gateway router (smc.bbnplanet.net).
The next hop goes to another BBN Planet router (denoted here only by IP address since a name was not assigned to the device), until the packet reaches the BBN Planet T3 backbone.
The packet takes two hops through routers at BBN Planet's Cambridge (MA) facility and is then forwarded to BBN Planet in New York City, where the packet takes four more hops.
The packet is then forwarded to BBN Planet in College Park (MD).
The packet is sent to BBN Planet's router at MAE East, MFS Datanet's Network Access Point (NAP) in Washington,
D.C. MAE stands for Metropolitan Area Exchange, and is a Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI)
ring interconnecting routers from subscribing ISPs.
The packet is then forwarded to NETCOM, Hill Associates' ISP.
The packet now travels through NETCOM's T3 backbone, following links from Washington, D.C. to Chicago to Santa Clara (CA), to San Jose (CA).
The packet is now sent to Hill Associates router (again, a system designated only by an IP address since the NETCOM side of the router was not named) and then passed to the target system.
Note that the host's real name is not www.hill.com, but syrup.hill.com.
The original version of Traceroute works by sending a sequence of User Datagram Protocol (UDP) datagrams to an invalid port address at the remote host.
Using the default settings, three datagrams are sent, each with a Time To Live (TTL) field value set to one.
The TTL value of 1 causes the datagram to "timeout" as soon as it hits the first router in the path; this router will then respond with an ICMP Time Exceeded Message (TEM) indicating that the datagram has expired.
Another three UDP messages are now sent, each with the TTL value set to 2, which causes the second router to return ICMP TEMs.
This process continues until the packets actually reach the other destination.
Since these datagrams are trying to access an invalid port at the destination host, ICMP Destination Unreachable Messages are returned indicating an unreachable port; this event signals the Traceroute program that it is finished!
The Traceroute program displays the round trip delay associated with each of the attempts.
(Note that some current implementations of Traceroute use the Record Route option in IP rather than the method described above.)
As an aside, Traceroute did not begin life as a general purpose utility, but as a quick and dirty debugging aid used to find a routing problem.
The code (complete with comments!) is available by anonymous FTP in the file traceroute.tar.
Z from the host ftp.ee.lbl.gov.
(See Section 4.2 for a discussion of anonymous FTP.)
www.hill.com traceroute to syrup.hill.com (199.182.20.3),
30 hops max, 38 byte packets 1  smc.bbnplanet.net
10 ms 3  cambridge1 cr4.bbnplanet.net (199.94.204.77)
40 ms 6  nyc2 br2.bbnplanet.net (4.0.1.154)
ms 7  nyc2 br2.bbnplanet.net (4.0.1.154)
ms 9  collegepk br2.bbnplanet.net (4.0.1.21)
ms  70 ms 12  t3 2.was dc gw1.netcom.net (163.179.220.181)
60 ms  50 ms 13  t3 2.chw
ms  80 ms 14  t3 2.scl
ms  110 ms  160 ms 15  t3 1.sjx
198.211.141.8 (198.211.141.8)  220 ms  260 ms
The two most basic tools for Internet applications are TELNET and the File Transfer Protocol (FTP).
TELNET allows a user to login to a remote host over a TCP/IP network, while FTP, as the name implies, allows a user to move files between two TCP/IP hosts.
These two utilities date back to the very early days of the ARPANET.
TELNET TELNET [27] is TCP/IP's virtual terminal protocol.
Using TELNET, a user connected to one host can login to another host, appearing like a directly attached terminal at the remote system; this is TCP/IP's definition of a virtual terminal.
The general form of the TELNET command is: telnet [IP address host name]
[port] As shown, a TELNET connection is initiated when the user enters the telnet command and supplies either a host name or IP address; if neither are given, TELNET will ask for one once the application begins.
In the example below, a user of a PC uses TELNET to attach to the remote host smcvax.smcvt.edu.
Once logged in via TELNET, the user can do anything on the remote host that would be possible if connected via a directly attached terminal or via modem.
The commands that are subsequently used are those available on the remote system to which the user is attached.
In the sample dialogue below, the user attached to SMCVAX will use basic VAX/VMS commands: The dir command lists the files having a "COM" file extension.
The mail command enters the VMS MAIL subsystem; the dir command here lists waiting mail.
Ping checks the status of another host.
When finished, the logout command logs the user off the remote host; TELNET automatically closes the connection to the remote host and returns control to the local system.
It is important to note that TELNET is a very powerful tool, one that may provide users with access to many Internet utilities and services that might not be otherwise available.
Many of these features are accessed by specifying a port number with the TELNET command, in addition to a host's address, and knowledge of port numbers provides another mechanism for users to access information with TELNET.
This guide discusses several TCP/IP and Internet utilities that require local client software, such as Finger, Whois, Archie, and Gopher.
But what if your software does not include a needed client?
In some cases, TELNET may be used to access a remote client and provide the same functionality.
This is done by specifying a port number with the TELNET command.
Just as TCP/IP hosts have a unique IP address, applications on the host are associated with an address, called a port.
Finger (see Section 3.3 above), for example, is associated with the well known port number 79.
In the absence of a Finger client, TELNETing to port 79 at a remote host may provide the same information.
You can finger another host with TELNET by using a command like: telnet host name 79
Other well known TCP port numbers include 25 (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol), 43 (whois), 80 (Hypertext Transfer Protocol), and 119 (Network News Transfer Protocol).
Some services are available on the Internet using TELNET and special port numbers.
A geographical information database, for example, may be accessed by TELNETing to port 3000 at host martini.eecs.umich.edu and current weather information is available at port 3000 at host downwind.sprl.umich.edu.
smcvax.smcvt.edu FTP Software PC/TCP tn
Copyright (c) 1986 1995 by FTP Software,
Inc. All rights reserved Connected to St. Michael's College
St. Michael's College VAX/VMS System.
Last interactive login on Monday, 16 SEP 1996 15:47 Last non interactive login on Wednesday,
You have 1 new Mail message.
Logged in on 17 SEP 1996 at 1:10 PM.
User [GUEST,KUMQUAT] has 3225 blocks used, 6775 available, of 10000 authorized and permitted overdraft of 100 blocks on $1$DIA2 To see a complete list of news items, type:
To read a particular item, type NEWS followed by the name of the item you wish to read.
(RWED,RWED,RE,) Total of 10 files, 233 blocks.
You have 1 new message.
: 56 data bytes 64 bytes from 199.182.20.24: icmp seq 0 time 290 ms 64 bytes from 199.182.20.24:
icmp seq 1 time 260 ms 64 bytes from 199.182.20.24:
icmp seq 2 time 260 ms 64 bytes from 199.182.20.24:
icmp seq 3 time 260 ms 64 bytes from 199.182.20.24:
icmp seq 4 time 260
5 packets transmitted, 5 packets received, 0% packet loss round trip (ms)
FTP FTP [26] is one of the most useful and powerful TCP/IP utilities for the general user.
FTP allows users to upload and download files between local and remote hosts.
Anonymous FTP, in particular, is commonly available at file archive sites to allow users to access files without having to pre establish an account at the remote host.
TELNET might, in fact, be used for this purpose but TELNET gives the user complete access to the remote system; FTP limits the user to file transfer activities.
The general form of the FTP command is: ftp [IP address host name]
An FTP session can be initiated in several ways.
In the example shown below, an FTP control connection is initiated to a host (the Defense Data Network's Network Information Center) by supplying a host name with the FTP command; optionally, the host's IP address in dotted decimal (numeric) form could be used.
If neither host name nor IP address are supplied in the command line, a connection to a host can be initiated by typing open host name or open IP address once the FTP application has been started.
The remote host will ask for a username and password.
If a bona fide registered user of this host supplies a valid username and password, then the user will have access to any files and directories to which this username has privilege.
For anonymous FTP access, the username anonymous is used.
Historically, the password for the anonymous user (not shown in actual use) has been guest, although most systems today ask for the user's Internet e mail address (and several sites attempt to verify that packets are coming from that address before allowing the user to login).
command may be used to obtain a list of FTP commands and help topics available with your software; although not always shown, nearly all TCP/IP applications have a help command.
An example of the help for FTP's type command is shown in the sample dialogue.
This command is very important one, by the way; if transferring a binary or executable file, be sure to set the type to image (or binary on some systems).
The dir command provides a directory listing of the files in the current directory at the remote host; the UNIX ls command may also usually be used.
Note that an FTP data transfer connection is established for the transfer of the directory information to the local host.
The output from the dir command will show a file listing that is consistent with the native operating system of the remote host.
Although the TCP/IP suite is often associated with UNIX, it can (and does) run with nearly all common operating systems.
The directory information shown in the sample dialogue happens to be in UNIX format and includes the following information: File attributes.
The next nine characters are the file access permissions list; the first three characters are for the owner, the next three for the owner's group, and the last three for all other users.
Three access privileges may be assigned to each file for each of these roups: read (r), write (w), and execute (x).
Number of entries, or hard links, in this structure.
This value will be a "1" if the entry refers to a file or link, or will be the number of files in the listed directory.
File owner File owner's group.
Date and time of last modification.
If the date is followed by a timestamp, then the date is from the current year.
After the directory information has been transferred, FTP closes the data transfer connection.
The command cd is used to change to another working directory, in this case the rfc directory (note that file and directory names may be case sensitive).
The CWD command successful is the only indication that the user's cd command was correctly executed; the show directory (may be truncated to fewer characters, as shown) command, if available, may be used to see which working directory you are in.
Another dir command is used to find all files with the name rfc173 .txt; note the use of the   wildcard character.
We can now copy (download)
the file of choice (RFC 1739 is the previous version of this primer) by using the get (or receive) command, which has the following general format: get remote file name local file name FTP opens another data transfer connection for this file transfer purpose; note that the effective data transfer rate is 93.664 kbps.
command allows uploading from the local host to the remote.
Put is often not available when using anonymous FTP.
Finally, we terminate the FTP connection by using the close command.
The user can initiate another FTP connection using the open command or can leave FTP by issuing a quit command.
Quit can also be used to close a connection and terminate a session.
It is important to note that different FTP packages have different commands available and even those with similar names may act differently.
In the example shown here (using MultiNet for VMS), the show command will display the current working directory; in FTP Software's OnNet, show will display a file from the remote host at the local host.
Some packages have nothing equivalent to either of these commands.
MultiNet FTP user process 3.4(111)
Connection opened (Assuming 8 bit connections)
anonymous <Guest login ok, send "guest" as password.
> help type TYPE Set the transfer type to type.
Format TYPE   type Additional information available: Parameters Example    Restrictions
TYPE Parameters type Specify a value of ASCII, BACKUP, BINARY, IMAGE or LOGICAL  BYTE.
Use TYPE ASCII (the default) for transferring text files.
Use TYPE BACKUP to set the transfer type to IMAGE and write the local file with 2048 byte fixed length records.
Use this command to transfer VAX/VMS BACKUP save sets.
Use TYPE BINARY to transfer binary files (same as TYPE IMAGE).
Use TYPE IMAGE to transfer binary files (for example, .EXE).
Use TYPE LOGICAL BYTE to transfer binary files to or from a TOPS 20 machine.
dir <Opening ASCII mode data connection for /bin
Jul 15 23:00 ddn news
drwxr xr x  2 nic
drwxr xr x  2 nic
23:00 gosip drwxr xr x  2 nic
drwxr xr x  2 nic
21:03 registrar drwxr xr x  2 nic
drwxr xr x  3 nic
1437 bytes transferred at 33811 bps.
ms.   NIC.DDN.MIL> cd rfc <CWD command successful.
> show <"/rfc" is current directory.
<Opening ASCII mode data connection for /bin
rw r r   1 nic
rw r r   1 nic
rw r r   1 nic
rw r r   1 nic
rw r r   1 nic
rw r r   1 nic
670 bytes transferred at 26800 bps.
<Opening ASCII mode data connection for rfc1739.txt (102676 bytes).
105255 bytes transferred at 93664 bps.
User Database Lookup Tools Finding
other users on the Internet is an art, not a science.
Although there is a distributed database listing all of the 16  million hosts on the Internet, no similar database yet exists for the tens of millions of users.
While many commercial ISPs provide directories of the users of their network, these databases are not yet linked.
The paragraphs below will discuss some of the tools available for finding users on the Internet.
WHOIS/NICNAME WHOIS and NICNAME are TCP/IP applications that search databases to find the name of network and system administrators, RFC authors, system and network points of contact, and other individuals who are registered in appropriate databases.
The original NICNAME/WHOIS protocol is described in RFC 954 [10].
WHOIS may be accessed by TELNETing to an appropriate WHOIS server and logging in as whois (no password is required); the most common Internet name server is located at the Internet Network Information Center (InterNIC) at rs.internic.net.
This specific database only contains INTERNET domains, IP network numbers, and domain points of contact; policies governing the InterNIC database are described in RFC 1400 [31].
The MILNET database resides at nic.ddn.mil and PSI's White Pages pilot service is located at psi.com.
Many software packages contain a WHOIS/NICNAME client that automatically establishes the TELNET connection to a default name server database, although users can usually specify any name server database that they want.
The accompanying dialogues shows several types of WHOIS/NICNAME information queries.
In the session below, we request information about an individual (Denis Stratford) by using WHOIS locally, a specific domain (hill.com) by using NICNAME locally, and a network address (199.182.20.0) and high level domain (com) using TELNET to a WHOIS server.
(802) 654 2384 Record last updated on 02 Nov 92.
US Domain Name: HILL.COM Administrative Contact: Kessler, Gary C.  (GK34)
Monaghan, Carol A.  (CAM4)  c.monaghan@HILL.COM 802 655 0940
Parry, Amy  (AP1257)  a.parry@HILL.COM 802 655 0940 Record last updated on 11 Jun 96.
Record created on 11 Jan 93.
Domain servers in listed order: SYRUP.HILL.COM
(Elec Comm Priv Act, 18 USC 2701 2711)
InterNIC WHOIS Version: 1.2 Wed,
18 Sep 96 09:49:50   Whois: 199.182.20.0 Hill Associates (NET HILLASSC) 17 Roosevelt Highway Colchester,
Monaghan, Carol A.  (CAM4)  c.monaghan@HILL.COM
802 655 0940 Record last updated on 17 May 94.
Whois: com dom Commercial top level domain (COM DOM)
Inc. 505 Huntmar park Dr. Herndon
, VA 22070 Domain Name:
COM Administrative Contact, Technical Contact,
Network Solutions, Inc.  (HOSTMASTER)  hostmaster@INTERNIC.NET (703
742 4811 Record last updated on 02 Sep 94.
Record created on 01 Jan 85.
Domain servers in listed order: A.ROOT SERVERS.NET
Would you like to see the known domains under this top level domain?
EST Connection #0 closed C:
KNOWBOT KNOWBOT is an automated username database search tool that is related to WHOIS.
The Knowbot Information Service (KIS), operated by the Corporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI) in Reston, Virginia, provides a simple WHOIS like interface that allows users to query several Internet user databases (White Pages services)
A single KIS query will automatically search the InterNIC, MILNET, MCImail, and PSI White Pages Pilot Project; other databases may also be included.
KNOWBOT may be accessed by TELNETing to host info.cnri.reston.va.us.
The help command will supply sufficient information to get started.
The sample dialogue below shows use of the query command to locate a user named "Steven Shepard"; this command automatically starts a search through the default set of Internet databases.
info.cnri.reston.va.us Knowbot Information Service KIS Client (V2.0).
KIS searches various Internet directory services to find someone's street address, email address and phone number.
Type 'man' at the prompt for a complete reference with examples.
Type 'help' for a quick reference to commands.
Type 'news' for information about recent changes.
Please enter your email address in our guest book...
query shepard, steven Trying whois at ds.internic.net...
The ds.internic.net whois server is being queried: Nothing returned.
The rs.internic.net whois server is being queried:
Shepard, Steven (SS2192)  708 810 5215 Shepard, Steven (SS1302)
The nic.ddn.mil whois server is being queried: Shepard, Steven (SS2192)
R.R. Donnelley & Sons 750 Warrenville Road Lisle, IL 60532 Trying mcimail at cnri.reston.va.us...
No match found for .SHEPARD,
> quit KIS exiting Connection
Information Servers File transfer, remote login, and electronic mail remained the primary applications of the ARPANET/Internet until the early 1990s.
But as the Internet user population shifted from hard core computer researchers and academics to more casual users, easier to use tools were needed for the Net to become accepted as a useful resource.
That means making things easier to find.
This section will discuss some of the early tools that made it easier to locate and access information on the Internet.
Archie Archie, developed in 1992 at the Computer Science Department at McGill University in Montreal, allows users to find software, data, and other information files that reside at anonymous FTP archive sites; the name of the program, reportedly, is derived from the word "archive" and not from the comic book character.
Archie tracks the contents of several thousand anonymous FTP sites containing millions of files.
The archie server automatically updates the information from each registered site about once a month, providing relatively up to date information without unduly stressing the network.
Archie, however, is not as popular as it once was and many sites have not updated their information; as the examples below show, many of the catalog listings are several years old.
Before using archie, you must identify a server address.
The sites below all support archie; most (but not all) archie sites support the servers command which lists all known archie servers.
Due to the popularity of archie at some sites and its high processing demands, many sites limit access to non peak hours and/or limit the number of simultaneous archie users.
All archie sites can be accessed using archie client software.
Some archie servers may be accessed using TELNET; when TELNETing to an archie site, login as archie (you must use lower case) and hit <ENTER> if a password is requested.
Once connected, the help command assists users in obtaining more information about using archie.
Two more useful archie commands are prog, used to search for files in the database, and whatis, which searches for keywords in the program descriptions.
In the accompanying dialogue, the set maxhits command is used to limit the number of responses to any following prog commands; if this is not done, the user may get an enormous amount of information.
In this example, the user issues a request to find entries related to "dilbert"; armed with this information, a user can use anonymous FTP to examine these directories and files.
The next request is for files with "tcp/ip" as a keyword descriptor.
These responses can be used for subsequent prog commands.
Exit archie using the exit command.
At this point, TELNET closes the connection and control returns to the local host.
Additional information about archie can be obtained by sending e mail to Bunyip Information Systems (archie info@bunyip.com).
Client software is not required to use archie, but can make life a little easier; some such software can be downloaded using anonymous FTP from the /pub/archie/clients/ directory at ftp.sura.net (note that the newest program in this directory is dated June 1994).
Most shareware and commercial archie clients hide the complexity described in this section; users usually connect to a pre configured archie server merely by typing an archie command line.
Welcome to the ARCHIE server at the University of Nebraska Lincoln # Bunyip Information Systems, 1993
These are the commands you can use in help: .
go up one level in the hierarchy ?
display a list of valid subtopics at the current level <newline>
quit from help entirely <string>
help on a topic or subtopic Eg.
"help show" will give you the help screen for the "show" command "help set search
" Will give you the help information for the "search" variable.
The command "manpage" will give you a complete copy of the archie manual page.
# Your queue position: 2 # Estimated time for completion: 00:20 Host ftp.wustl.edu
Last updated 10:08 25 Dec 1993 Location: /multimedia/images/gif/unindexed/931118
M.T. Management Information Base for network management of TCP/IP based internets.
M.T. ISO presentation services on top of TCP/IP based internets.
FYI on a network management tool catalog:
Tools for monitoring and debugging TCP/IP internets and interconnected devices.
1990 May; 22 p. (Obsoletes RFC 1065)
M.T. Management Information Base for network management of TCP/IP based internets.
1990 May; 91 p. (Obsoletes RFC 1066)
Management Information Base for network management of TCP/IP based internets: MIB II.
Management Information Base for network management of TCP/IP based internets:MIB II.
Send ICMP ECHO requests to a host on the network (TCP/IP) to see whether it's reachable or not   unl archie> exit # Bye.
Gopher The Internet Gopher protocol was developed at the University of Minnesota's Microcomputer Center in 1991, as a distributed information search and retrieval tool for the Internet.
Gopher is described in RFC 1436 [1]; the name derives from the University's mascot.
Gopher provides a tool so that publicly available information at a host can be organized in a hierarchical fashion using simple text descriptions, allowing files to be perused using a simple menu system.
Gopher also allows a user to view a file on demand without requiring additional file transfer protocols.
In addition, Gopher introduced the capability of linking sites on the Internet, so that each Gopher site can be used as a stepping stone to access other sites and reducing the amount of duplicate information and effort on the network.
Any Gopher site can be accessed using Gopher client software (or a WWW browser).
In many cases, users can access Gopher by TELNETing to a valid Gopher location; if the site provides a remote Gopher client, the user will see a text based, menu interface.
The number of Gopher sites grew rapidly between 1991 and 1994, although growth tapered due to the introduction of the Web; in any case, most Gopher sites have a menu item that will allow you to identify other Gopher sites.
If using TELNET, login with the username gopher (this must be in lowercase); no password is required.
In the sample dialogue below, the user attaches to the Gopher server at the Internet Network Information Center (InterNIC) by TELNETing to ds.internic.net.
With the menu interface shown here, the user merely follows the prompts.
Initially, the main menu will appear.
Selecting item 3 causes Gopher to seize and display the "InterNIC Registration Services (NSI)
Users may also search for strings within files using the / command or download the file being interrogated using the D command.
Menu item 1 within the first submenu (selected in the dialogue shown here) is titled "InterNIC Registration Archives.
" As its submenu implies, this is a place to obtain files containing the InterNIC's domain registration policies, domain data, registration forms, and other information related to registering names and domains on the Internet.
localhost    1.  About InterNIC Directory and Database Services/ 2.
InterNIC Directory and Database Services (AT&T)/ 3.
InterNIC Registration Services (NSI)/ 4.
Whois Searches (InterNIC IP, ASN, DNS, and POC Registry) <?
1/1   View item number: 1 Internet Gopher Information Client v2.1.3
The problem with being blessed with so much information from FTP, archie, Gopher, and other sources is exactly that   too much information.
To make it easier for users to locate the system on which their desired information resides, a number of other tools have been created.
VERONICA (Very Easy Rodent Oriented Net wide Index to Computerized Archives) was developed at the University of Nevada at Reno as an archie  like adjunct to Gopher.
As the number of Gopher sites quickly grew after its introduction, it became increasingly harder to find information in gopherspace since Gopher was designed to search a single database at a time.
VERONICA maintains an index of titles of Gopher items and performs a keyword search on all of the Gopher sites that it has knowledge of and access to, obviating the need for the user to perform a menu by menu, site by site search for information.
When a user selects an item from the menu of a VERONICA search, "sessions" are automatically established with the appropriate Gopher servers, and a list of data items is returned to the originating Gopher client in the form of a Gopher menu so that the user can access the files.
VERONICA is available as an option on many Gopher servers.
Another Gopher adjunct is JUGHEAD (Jonzy's Universal Gopher Hierarchy Excavation And Display).
JUGHEAD supports key word searches and the use of logical operators (AND, OR, and NOT).
The result of a JUGHEAD search is a display of all menu items which match the search string which are located in the University of Manchester and UMIST Information Server, working from a static database that is re created every day.
JUGHEAD is available from many Gopher sites, although VERONICA may be a better tool for global searches.
The Wide Area Information Server (WAIS, pronounced "ways") was initiated jointly by Apple Computer, Dow Jones, KMPG Peat Marwick, and
Thinking Machines Corp. It is a set of free ware, share ware, and commercial software products for a wide variety of hardware/software platforms, which work together to help users find information on the Internet.
WAIS provides a single interface through which a user can access many different information databases.
The user interface allows a query to be formulated in English and the WAIS server will automatically choose the appropriate databases to search.
Further information about WAIS can be obtained by reading the WAIS FAQ, from host rtfm.mit.edu in file /pub
The World Wide Web (WWW) is thought (erroneously) by many to be the same thing as the Internet.
But the confusion, in many ways, is justified; by early 1996, the WWW accounted for over 40% of all of the traffic on the Internet.
In addition, the number of hosts on the Internet named www has grown from several hundred in mid 1994 to 17,000 in mid 1995 to 212,000 in mid 1996 to over 410,000 by early 1997.
The Web has made information on the Internet accessible to users of all ages and computer skill levels.
It has provided a mechanism so that nearly anyone can become a content provider.
According to some, growth in the number of WWW users is unparalleled by any other event in human history.
The WWW was developed in the early 1990s at the CERN Institute for Particle Physics in Geneva, Switzerland.
The Web was designed to combine aspects of information retrieval with multimedia communications, unlike archie and Gopher, which were primarily used for the indexing of text based files.
The Web allows users to access information in many different types of formats, including text, sound, image, animation, and video.
WWW treats all searchable Internet files as hypertext documents.
Hypertext is a term which merely refers to text that contains pointers to other text, allowing a user reading one document to jump to another document for more information on a given topic, and then return to the same location in the original document.
WWW hypermedia documents are able to employ images, sound, graphics, video, and animation in addition to text.
To access WWW servers, users must run client software called a browser.
The browser and server use the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) [3].
WWW documents are written in the Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) [2, 20], a simple text based formatting language that is hardware and software platform independent.
Users point the browser at some location using a shorthand format called a Uniform Resource Locator (URL), which allows a WWW servers to obtain files from any location on the public Internet using a variety of protocols, including HTTP, FTP, Gopher, and TELNET.
Mosaic, developed in 1994 at the National Center for Supercomputer Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois at Urbana  Champaign, was the first widely used browser.
Because it was available at no cost over the Internet via anonymous FTP, and had a version for Windows, Mac, and UNIX systems, Mosaic was probably the single reason that the Web attracted so many users so quickly.
The most commonly used browsers today include the Netscape Navigator (http://www.netscape.com), Microsoft's Internet Explorer (http://www.microsoft.com), and NCSA Mosaic (http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/SDG/Software/Mosaic/).
The WWW is ideally suited to a windows environment, or other point  and click graphical user interface.
Nevertheless, several text based Web browsers do exist, although their usefulness is limited if trying to obtain graphical images, or audio or video clips.
One text based Web browser is Lynx, and an example of its use is shown below.
Items in square brackets in the sample dialogue are Lynx's way of indicating an image or other display that cannot be shown on an ASCII terminal.
Making HTTP connection to www.hill.com.
HTTP request sent; waiting for response.
Read 176 bytes of data.
512 of 2502 bytes of data.
1024 of 2502 bytes of data.
536 2048 502 Data transfer complete Hill Associates
Inc. Leaders in Telecommunications Training and Education
Hill Associates is an international provider of voice and data telecommunications training and education.
We cover the full breadth of the field, including telephony, computer networks, ISDN, X.25 and fast packet technologies (frame relay, SMDS, ATM), wireless, TCP/IP and the Internet, LANs and LAN interconnection, legacy networks, multimedia and virtual reality, broadband services, regulation, service strategies, and network security.
Hill Associates' products and services include instructor led, computer based (CBT), and hands on workshop courses.
Courseware distribution media include audio tape, video tape, CD ROM, and 3.5" disks (PC).
Hill Associates products, services, and corporate information   About Hill Associates
HAI Products and Services Catalog   Datacomm/2000 ED Series
HAI Personnel Home Pages On line information resources from Hill Associates
HAI Telecommunications Acronym List   Articles, Books, and On Line Presentations by HAI Staff
Hill Associates is host to the:
Local Computer Networks Conference Home Page...
Please send any comments or suggestions to the HAI Webmaster.
Information at this site (c) 1994 1997 Hill Associates.
Arrow keys: Up and Down to move.
Right to follow a link
; Left to go back.
O)ptions P)rint G)o M)ain screen Q)uit / search [delete] history list
Making HTTP connection to www.bbn.com.
HTTP request sent; waiting for response.
Read 119 bytes of data.
500 1000 bytes of data.
2 5 925 Data transfer complete BBN
On The World Wide Web [LINK] BBN Reports Fourth Quarter and Year End
1996 Results [INLINE] [ISMAP] [ISMAP]
How The Noc Solves Problems Noc Noc
BBN Planet Network Map [LINK][LINK][LINK][LINK][LINK][LINK] [LINK] Contact BBN Planet Directions to BBN Text only index of the BBN Web site
Corporate Disclaimer Send questions and comments about our site to Webmaster@bbn.com (c)
1996 BBN Corporation Arrow keys: Up and Down to move.
Right to follow a link
; Left to go back.
O)ptions P)rint G)o M)ain screen Q)uit / search [delete] history list
As more and more protocols have become available to identify files, archive and server sites, news lists, and other information resources on the Internet, it was inevitable that some shorthand would arise to make it easier to designate these sources.
The common shorthand format is called the Uniform Resource Locator.
The list below provides information on how the URL format should be interpreted for the protocols and resources that will be discussed in this document.
A complete description of the URL format may be found in [4].
file://host/directory/file name Identifies a specific file.
E.g., the file htmlasst in the edu directory at host ftp.cs.da would be denoted, using the full URL form:  <URL:file://ftp.cs.da/edu/htmlasst
password@host:port/directory/file name Identifies an FTP site.
Identifies a Gopher site and menu path;
a "00" at the start of the path indicates a directory and "11" indicates a file.
Identifies a WWW server location.
e mail address Identifies an individual's Internet mail address.
:port/ Identifies a TELNET location (the trailing "/
User Directories on the Web
While finding users on the Internet remains somewhat like alchemy if using the tools and utilities mentioned earlier, the Web has added a new dimension to finding people.
Since 1995, many telephone companies have placed national white and yellow page telephone directories on  line, accessible via the World Wide Web.
For a while, it seemed that the easiest and most reliable approach to finding people's e mail address on the Internet was to look up their telephone number on the Web, call them, and ask for their e mail address!
More recently, however, many third parties are augmenting the standard telephone directory with an e mail directory.
These services primarily rely on users voluntarily registering, resulting in incomplete databases because most users don't know about all of the services.
Nevertheless, some of the personal directory services available via the Web with which e mail addresses (and telephone numbers)
can be found include Four11 Directory Services (http://www.Four11.com/), Excite (http://www.excite.com/Reference/locators.html), and Yahoo!
In addition, the Knowbot Information Service (KIS), CNRI's automated username database search tool described earlier in this document, is also available on the Web, at http://info.cnri.reston.va.us/kis.html.
Users can select several options for the KIS search, including the InterNIC, MILNET, MCImail, and Latin American Internic databases; UNIX finger and whois servers; and X.500 databases.
the Web Many of the other utilities described earlier in this document can also be accessed via the WWW.
In general, the Web browser acts as a viewer to a remote client rather than requiring specialized software on the user's system.
Several sites provide DNS information, obviating the need for a user to have a local DNS client such as NSLOOKUP.
The hosts http://ns1.milepost.com/dns/ and http://sh1.ro.com/~mprevost/netutils/dig.html are among the best DNS sites, allowing the user to access all DNS information.
The site http://www.bankes.com/nslookup.htm allows users to do multiple, sequential searches at a given domain.
Other Web sites providing simple DNS name/address translation services include http://rhinoceros.cs.inf.shizuoka.ac.jp/dns.html, http://www.engin.umich.edu/htbin/DNSquery, http://www.lublin.pl/cgi
Ping is another service available on the Web.
The http://sh1.ro.com/~mprevost/netutils/ping.html page allows a user to select a host name, number of times to ping (1 10), and number of seconds between each ping (1 10), and returns a set of summary statistics.
Other Web based ping sites include http://www.net.cmu.edu/bin/ping (sends ten pings, and reports the times and min/max/avg summary statistics) and http://www.uia.ac.be/cc/ping.html (indicates whether the target host is alive or not).
Traceroute is also available on the Web.
Unfortunately, these servers trace the route from their host to a host that the user chooses, rather than from the user's host to the target.
Nevertheless, interesting route information can be found at http://www.net.cmu.edu/bin/traceroute.
Traceroute service and a list of a number of other traceroute sites on the Web can be found at http://www.lublin.pl/cgi bin/trace/traceroute.
Access to archie is also available via the WWW, where your browser acts as the graphical interface to an archie server.
To find a list of archie servers, and to access them via the Web, point your browser at http://www.yahoo.com/Computers and Internet/Internet/FTP Sites/ Searching/Archie/.
Finally, even Finger can be found on the World Wide Web; check out http://sh1.ro.com/~mprevost/netutils/finger.html.
Discussion Lists and Newsgroups Among the most useful features of the Internet are the discussion lists that have become available to allow individuals to discuss topics of mutual concern.
Discussion list topics range from SCUBA diving and home brewing of beer to AIDS research and foreign policy.
Several, naturally, deal specifically with the Internet, TCP/IP protocols, and the impact of new technologies.
Most of the discussion lists accessible from the Internet are unmoderated, meaning that anyone can send a message to the list's central repository and the message will then be automatically forwarded to all subscribers of the list.
These lists provide very fast turn around between submission of a message and delivery, but often result in a lot of messages (including inappropriate junk mail, or "spam").
A moderated list has an extra step; a human list moderator examines all messages before they are forwarded to ensure that the messages are appropriate to the list and not needlessly inflammatory!
Users should be warned that some lists generate a large number of messages each day.
Before subscribing to too many lists, be sure that you are aware of local policies and/or charges governing access to discussion lists and e mail storage.
Internet Discussion Lists Mail can be sent to almost all Internet lists at an address with the following form:
list name@host name The common convention when users want to subscribe, unsubscribe, or handle any other administrative matter is to send a message to the list administrator; do not send administrivia to the main list address!
The list administrator can usually be found at: list name REQUEST@host name To subscribe to a list, it is often enough to place the word "subscribe" in the main body of the message, although a line with the format: subscribe list name your full name will satisfy most mail servers.
A similar message may be used to get off a list; just use the word "unsubscribe" followed by the list name.
Not every list follows this convention, but it is a safe bet if you don't have better information!
A large set of discussion groups is maintained using a program called LISTSERV.
LISTSERV is a service provided widely on BITNET and EARN, although it is also available to Internet users.
A LISTSERV User Guide can be found on the Web at http://www.earn.net/lug/notice.html.
Mail can be sent to most LISTSERV lists at an address with the following form: list name@host name The common convention when users want to subscribe, unsubscribe, or handle any other administrative matter is to send commands in a message to the LISTSERV server; do not send administrivia to the main list address!
The list server can usually be found at: LISTSERV@host name LISTSERV commands are placed in the main body of e mail messages sent to an appropriate list server location.
Once you have found a list of interest, you can send a message to the appropriate address with any appropriate command, such as: subscribe  list name  your full name Subscribe to a list unsubscribe  list name
Unsubscribe from a list help
Majordomo Majordomo is another popular list server for Internet discussion lists.
The Web site http://www.greatcircle.com/majordomo/ has a large amount of information about Majordomo.
Mail is sent to Majordomo lists using the same general address format as above:
list name@host name The common convention when users want to subscribe, unsubscribe, or handle any other administrative matter is to send a message to the Majordomo list server; do not send administrivia to the main list address!
The Majordomo server can usually be found at: MAJORDOMO@host name Majordomo commands are placed in the main body of e mail messages sent to an appropriate list server location.
(E mail address is optional) info list
Usenet Usenet, also known as NETNEWS or Usenet news, is another information source with its own set of special interest mailing lists organized into newsgroups.
Usenet originated on UNIX systems but has migrated to many other types of hosts.
Usenet clients, called newsreaders, use the Network News Transfer Protocol [13] and are available for virtually any operating system; several web browsers, in fact, have this capability built in.
While Usenet newsgroups are usually accessible at Internet sites, a prospective Usenet client host must have appropriate newsreader software to be able to read news.
Users will have to check with their local host or network administrator to find out what Usenet newsgroups are locally available, as well as the local policies for using them.
Usenet newsgroup names are hierarchical in nature.
The first part of the name, called the hierarchy, provides an indication about the general subject area.
There are two types of hierarchies, called mainstream and alternative; the total number of newsgroups is in the thousands.
The news.announce.newusers newsgroup is a good place for new Usenet users to find a detailed introduction to the use of Usenet, as well as an introduction to its culture.
Usenet mainstream hierarchies are established by a process that requires the approval of a majority of Usenet members.
The alternative hierarchies include lists that may be set up at any site that has the server software and disk space.
These lists are not formally part of Usenet and, therefore, may not be received by all sites getting NETNEWS.
AT&T 3B computers vmsnet    Digital's VMS operating system 8.5 Finding Discussion Lists and Newsgroups Armed with the rules for signing up for a discussion list or accessing a newsgroup, how does one find an appropriate list given one's interests?
There are tens of thousands of e mail discussion lists on the Internet.
One List of Lists may be found using anonymous FTP at ftp://sri.com/netinfo/interest groups.txt; the List of Lists can be searched using a Web browser by going to http://catalog.com/vivian/interest group search.html.
Other places to look are the Publicly Accessible Mailing Lists index at http://www.neosoft.com/internet/paml/byname.html and the LISZT Directory of E Mail Discussion Groups at http://www.liszt.com.
To obtain a list of LISTSERV lists, send e mail to listserv@bitnic.cren.net with the command lists global in the body of the message.
Alternatively, look on the Web at http://www.tile.net/tile/listserv/index.html.
The Web site http://www.liszt.com has a Mailing Lists Database of lists served by LISTSERV and Majordomo.
There are also thousands of Usenet newsgroups.
One Usenet archive can be found at gopher://rtfm.mit.edu/11//pub/usenet/news.answers; see the /active newsgroups and /alt hierarchies subdirectories.
Usenet news may also be read at gopher://gopher.bham.ac.uk/11/Usenet.
A good Usenet search facility can be found at DejaNews at http://www.dejanews.com/; messages can also be posted to Usenet newsgroups from this site.
Note that there is often some overlap between Usenet newsgroups and Internet discussion lists.
Some individuals join both lists in these circumstances or, often, there is cross posting of messages.
Some Usenet newsgroup discussions are forwarded onto an Internet mailing list by an individual site to provide access to those users who do not have Usenet available.
Internet Documentation To fully appreciate and understand what is going on within the Internet community, users might wish to obtain the occasional Internet specification.
The main body of Internet documents are Request for Comments (RFCs), although a variety of RFC subsets have been defined for various specific purposes.
The sections below will describe the RFCs and other documentation, and how to get them.
The Internet standardization process is alluded to in the following sections.
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is the guiding body for Internet standards; their Web site is http://www.ietf.org.
The IETF operates under the auspices of the Internet Society (ISOC), which has a Web site at http://www.isoc.org.
For complete, up to date information on obtaining Internet documentation, go to the InterNIC's Web site at http://ds.internic.net/ds/dspg0intdoc.html.
The IETF's history and role in the Internet today is described in Kessler [15].
For information on the organizations involved in the IETF standards process, see RFC 2028 [11].
For information on the relationship between the IETF and ISOC, see RFC 2031 [12].
(RFCs) RFCs are the body of literature comprising Internet protocols, standards, research questions, hot topics, humor (especially those dated 1 April), and general information.
Each RFC is uniquely issued a number which is never reused or reissued; if a document is revised, it is given a new RFC number and the old RFC is said to be obsoleted.
Announcements are sent to the RFC DIST mailing list whenever a new RFC is issued; anyone may join this list by sending e mail to majordomo@zephyr.isi.edu with the line "subscribe rfc dist" in the body of the message.
RFCs may be obtained through the mail (i.e., postal service), but it is easier and faster to get them on line.
One easy way to obtain RFCs on line is to use RFC INFO, an e mail based service to help users locate and retrieve RFCs and other Internet documents.
(Help file on how to get RFCs
mmm dd yyyy DATED BEFORE:
(List RFCs obsoleting RFC xxxx)
Another RFC e mail server can be found at the InterNIC.
To use this service, send an e mail message to mailserv@ds.internic.net, leaving the Subject: field blank.
(Text version of RFC NNNN)
(Postscript version of RFC NNNN) document by name rfcNNNN
(Text version of RFC NNNN)
To obtain an RFC via anonymous FTP, connect to one of the RFC repositories listed in Table 1 using FTP.
After connecting, change to the appropriate RFC directory (as shown in Table 1) using the cd command.
To obtain a particular file, use the get command:
(Text version of RFC xxxx)
The RFC index, or a specific reference to an RFC, will indicate whether the RFC is available in ASCII text (.txt) or Postscript (.ps) format.
By convention, all RFCs are available in ASCII while some are also available in Postscript where use of graphics and/or different fonts adds more information or clarity; an increasing number are also being converted to HTML.
Be aware that the index file is very large, containing the citing for over 2,000 documents.
Note that not all RFCs numbered below 698 (July 1975)
Finally, the InterNIC's Web site at http://ds.internic.net/ds/dspg1intdoc.html contains the RFC index and a complete set of RFCs.
More information about Web based RFC servers can be found at http://www.isi.edu/rfc editor/rfc sources.html.
The sample dialogue below, although highly abbreviated, shows a user obtaining RFC 1594
(Answers to Commonly asked "New Internet User" Questions) using e mail and anonymous FTP.
> send   To: in%"rfc info@isi.edu
Press CTRL/Z when complete, CTRL/C to quit   retrieve:
> get rfc1594.txt rfc 1594.txt
Internet Standards RFCs describe many aspects of the Internet.
By the early 1990s, however, so many specifications of various protocols had been written that it was not always clear as to which documents represented standards for the Internet.
For that reason, a subset of RFCs have been designated as STDs to identify them as Internet standards.
Unlike RFC numbers that are never reused, STD numbers always refer to the latest version of the standard.
UDP, for example, would be completely identified as "STD 6/RFC 768.
Note that STD numbers refer to a standard, which is not necessarily a single document
; STD 19, for example, is the NetBIOS Service Protocols standard comprising RFCs 1001 and 1002, and a complete citation for this standard would be "STD 19/RFC 001/RFC 1002.
" The availability of new STDs is announced on the RFC DIST mailing list.
STD 1 [23] always refers to the latest list of "Internet Official Protocol Standards".
The Internet standards process is described in RFC 2026 [5] and STD notes are explained in RFC 1311 [24].
STDs can be obtained as RFCs via anonymous FTP from any RFC repository.
In addition, some RFC sites (such as ds.internic.net) provide an STD directory so that STD documents can be found in the path /STD
TXT, where xx refers to the STD number.
STD documents may be obtained as RFCs using the methods described in Section 9.1.
STDs may also be obtained via the RFC INFO server using the RETRIEVE:
STD  and Doc ID: STDxxxx commands.
Also, check out the InterNIC's Web site at http://www.internic.net/std/ for the STD index and a complete set of STDs.
For Your Information Documents The For Your Information (FYI) series of RFCs provides Internet users with information about many topics related to the Internet.
FYI topics range from historical to explanatory to tutorial, and are aimed at the wide spectrum of people that use the Internet.
The FYI series includes answers to frequently asked questions by both beginning and seasoned users of the Internet, an annotated bibliography of Internet books, and an explanation of the domain name system.
Like the STDs, an FYI number always refers to the latest version of an FYI.
FYI 4, for example, refers to the answers to commonly asked questions by new Internet users; its complete citation would be "FYI 4/RFC 1594."
The FYI notes are explained in FYI 1 [18].
FYIs can be obtained as RFCs via anonymous FTP from any RFC repository.
In addition, some RFC sites (such as ds.internic.net) provide an FYI directory so that FYI documents can be found in the path /FYI
TXT, where xx refers to the FYI number.
FYI documents may be obtained as RFCs using the methods described in Section 9.1.
FYIs may also be obtained via the RFC INFO server using the RETRIEVE: FYI and Doc ID: FYIxxxx commands.
Also, check out the InterNIC's Web site at http://www.internic.net/fyi/ for the FYI index and a complete set of FYIs.
Best Current Practices Standards track RFCs are formally part of the IETF standards process, subject to peer review, and intended to culminate in an official Internet Standard.
Other RFCs are published on a less formal basis and are not part of the IETF process.
To provide a mechanism of publishing relevant technical information which it endorsed, the IETF created a new series of RFCs, called the Best Current Practices (BCP) series.
BCP topics include variances from the Internet standards process and IP address allocation in private networks.
Like the STDs and FYIs, a BCP number always refers to the latest version of a BCP.
BCP 5, for example, describes an IP address allocation plan for private networks; its complete citation would be "BCP 5/RFC 1918."
The BCP process is explained in BCP 1 [25].
BCP documents may be obtained as RFCs using the methods described in Section 9.1.
BCPs may also be obtained via the RFC INFO server using the RETRIEVE:
BCP and Doc ID: BCPxxxx commands.
Also, check out the RFC Editor's Web site at http://www.isi.edu/rfc editor/ for the BCP index and a complete set of BCPs.
the Reseaux Associes pour la Recherche Europeenne (Association of European Research Networks), has a charter to promote and participate in the creation of a high quality European computer communications infrastructure for the support of research endeavors.
RARE member networks use Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) protocols and TCP/IP.
To promote a closer relationship between RARE and the IETF, RARE Technical Reports (RTRs) have also been published as RFCs since the summer of 1993.
RTR documents may be obtained as RFCs using the methods described in Section 9.1.
RTRs may also be obtained via the RFC INFO server using the RETRIEVE: RTR  and Doc ID: RTRxxxx commands.
Also, check out the InterNIC's Web site at http://www.internic.net/rtr/ for the RTR index and a complete set of RTRs.
Finally, RTRs may be obtained via anonymous FTP from ftp://ftp.rare.nl/rare/publications/rtr/. 10.
This guide is intended to provide the reader with a rudimentary ability to use the utilities that are provided by TCP/IP and the Internet.
By now, it is clear that the user's knowledge, ability, and willingness to experiment are about the only limits to what can be accomplished.
There are several books that will help you get started finding sites on the Internet, including The INTERNET Yellow Pages [9].
But much more timely and up to date
information can be found on the Internet itself, using such search tools as Yahoo!
(http://www.yahoo.com), Excite (http://www.excite.com), Lycos (http://www.lycos.com), WebCrawler (http://www.webcrawler.com), and AltaAvista (http://altavista.digital.com).
There are several other sources that cite locations from which to access specific information about a wide range of subjects using such tools as FTP, Telnet, Gopher, and WWW.
One of the best periodic lists, and archives, is through the Scout Report, a weekly publication by the InterNIC's Net Scout Services Project at the University of Wisconsin's Computer Science Department.
To receive the Scout Report by e mail each week, join the mailing list by sending email to listserv@lists.internic.net; place
the line subscribe scout report your full name in the body of the message to receive the text version or use subscribe scout report
html your full name to receive the report in HTML.
The Scout Report is also available on the Web at http://www.cs.wisc.edu/scout/report and http://rs.internic.net/scout/report, or via anonymous FTP at ftp://rs.internic.net/scout/.
Another list is Yanoff's Internet Services List, which may be found at http://www.spectracom.com/islist/ or ftp://ftp.csd.uwm.edu/pub/inet.services.txt.
Gary Kessler, one of the co author's of this document, maintains his own eclectic Miscellaneous Sites List at http://www.together.net/~kessler/gck site.html.
If you are looking for Internet specific information, one good starting point is http://www.yahoo.com/Computers and Internet/
The InterNIC is another valuable resource, with their Scout Report and Scout Toolkit (http://rs.internic.net/scout/toolkit).
There is also a fair amount of rudimentary tutorial information available on the Internet.
The InterNIC cosponsors "The 15 Minute Series" (http://rs.internic.net/nic support/15min/), a collection of free, modular, and extensible training materials on specific Internet topics.
(http://www.ua.edu/~crispen/roadmap.html) is a free, 27 lesson Internet training workshop over e mail.
More books and specialized articles came out about the Internet in 1993 and 1994 than in all previous years (squared!), and that trend has seemed to continue into 1995, 1996, and beyond.
Three books are worth notable mention because they do not directly relate to finding your way around, or finding things on, the Internet.
Hafner and Lyon [8] have written Where Wizards Stay Up Late:
The Origins of the Internet, a history of the development of the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), packet switching, and the ARPANET, focusing primarily on the 1960s and 1970s.
While culminating with the APRANET's 25th Anniversary in 1994, its main thrusts are on the groups building the ARPANET backbone (largely BBN) and the host to  host application and communication protocols (largely the Network Working Group).
Including a set of "diversions," his book is a bit more whimsical than Hafner & Lyon's.
Finally, Carl Malamud has written a delightful book called Exploring the Internet: A Technical Travelogue [17], chronicling not the history of the Internet as much as a subset of the people currently active in building and defining  it.
This book will not teach you how to perform an anonymous FTP file transfer nor how to use Gopher, but provides insights about our network (and Carl's gastro pathology) that no mere statistics can convey.
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
[10] Harrenstien, K., M. Stahl, and E. Feinler, "NICNAME/WHOIS," RFC 954, SRI, October 1985.
[11] Hovey, R. and S. Bradner.
The Organizations Involved in the IETF Standards Process," RFC 2028, Digital, Harvard University, October 1996.
[12] Huizer, E. "IETF ISOC Relationship," RFC 2031, SEC, October 1996.
[13] Kantor, B. and P. Lapsley. "
Network News Transfer Protocol," RFC 977, U.C. San Diego, U.C. Berkeley, February 1986.
[14] Kessler, G.C. "An Overview of TCP/IP Protocols and the Internet." URL:
IETF History, Background, and Role in Today's Internet."
Last accessed: 17 February 1997.
Last accessed: 17 February 1997.)
[17] Malamud, C. Exploring the Internet: A Technical Travelogue.
Englewood Cliffs (NJ): PTR Prentice Hall, 1992.
[18] Malkin, G.S. and J.K. Reynolds, "F.Y.I. on F.Y.I.
: Introduction to the F.Y.I. notes," FYI 1/RFC 1150, Proteon, USC/Information Sciences Institute, March 1990.
[19] Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names Concepts and Facilities," STD 13/RFC 1034, USC/Information Sciences Institute, November 1987.
[20] National Center for Supercomputer Applications (NCSA).
A Beginner's Guide to HTML."
Last accessed: 2 February 1997.
[21] Postel, J., "Domain Name System Structure and Delegation," USC/Information Sciences Institute, RFC 1591, March 1994.
[26]   and J. Reynolds, "File Transfer Protocol (FTP)," STD 9/RFC 959, USC/Information Sciences Institute, October 1985.
[27]   and J. Reynolds, "TELNET Protocol Specification," STD 8/RFC 854, USC/Information Sciences Institute, May 1983.
From ARPANET to INTERNET and beyond...
Reading (MA): Addison Wesley, 1995.
[29] Socolofsky, T.J. and C.J. Kale, "TCP/IP Tutorial," RFC 1180, Spider Systems Ltd., January 1991.
[30] Stevens, W.R. TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 1: The Protocols.
Reading (MA): Addison Wesley, 1994.
[31] Williamson, S., "Transition and Modernization of the Internet Registration Service," RFC 1400, Network Solutions, Inc., March 1993.
[32] Zimmerman, D., "The Finger User Information Protocol," RFC 1288, Rutgers University, December 1991.
