Abstract Mobile IPv4 message types range from 0 to 255.
This document reserves a message type for use by an individual, company, or organization for experimental purposes, to evaluate enhancements to Mobile IPv4 messages before a formal standards proposal is issued.
Introduction Mobile IPv4 message types range from 0 to 255.
This document reserves a message type for experimental purposes, to evaluate enhancements to Mobile IPv4 messages before a formal standards proposal is issued.
Without experimental message capability, one would have to select a type value from the range defined for IANA assignment, which may result in collisions.
Within a message, Mobile IP defines a general extension mechanism allowing optional information to be carried by Mobile IP control messages.
Extensions are not skippable if defined in the range [0  127] and are skippable if defined in the range [128 255].
This document reserves extension types in both the skippable and non  skippable ranges for experimental use.
Mobile IPv4 defines error codes for use by the FA [64 127] and HA [128 192].
This document reserves an error code in both of these ranges for experimental use.
The definition of experimental numbers in this document is made according to the recommendation of Section 2.2 of BCP 82, RFC 3692.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [1].
In addition, this document frequently uses the following terms: EXP MSG TYPE:
A Mobile IPv4 message number assigned for experimental use.
IANA has assigned message number 255 for this.
A Mobile IPv4 and ICMP router discovery Agent Advertisement extension number assigned for experimental use.
IANA has assigned extension number 255 for this.
A Mobile IPv4 and ICMP router discovery Agent Advertisement extension number for experimental use.
IANA has assigned extension number 127 for this.
A Mobile IPv4 error code for use by the HA in MIPv4 reply messages to indicate an error condition.
IANA has assigned error code 192 for this.
A Mobile IPv4 error code for use by FA in reply messages to indicate an error condition.
IANA has assigned error code 127 for this.
Mobility Entity: Entities as defined in [2] (home agent, foreign agent, and mobile node).
As the nature and purpose of an experimental message cannot be known in advance, the structure is defined as having an opaque payload.
Entities implementing the message can interpret the message according to their implementation.
Interpreting based on extensions present in the message is one suggestion.
These messages may be used between the mobility entities (Home Agent, Foreign Agent, and Mobile Node).
Experimental messages MUST be authenticated using any of the authentication mechanisms defined for Mobile IP ([2], [5]).
This message MAY contain extensions defined in Mobile IP, including vendor specific extensions [4].
Typically the interface address from which the message is sent.
The address of the agent or the Mobile Node.
Set to the value 434 Mobile IP fields shown below follow the UDP header.
Once an experimental message has been tested and shown to be useful, a permanent number should be obtained through the normal IANA numbers assignment procedures.
A single experimental message type is defined.
This message can contain extensions based on which the message can be interpreted.
Up to date values for the message types for Mobile IP control messages are specified in the most recent "Assigned Numbers" [3].
This document reserves Mobile IPv4 extensions in both the skippable and non skippable ranges for experimental purposes.
The long extension format (for non skippable extensions) and short extension format (for skippable extensions), as defined by [2], are used for Mobile IPv4 experimental extensions.
Also, ICMP router discovery extension numbers in both the skippable and non skippable ranges are reserved for experimental use.
This format is applicable for non skippable extensions and may carry information more than 256 bytes. 0
Sub Type  A unique number given to each member in the aggregated type.
Length    Indicates the length (in bytes) of the data field within this extension.
It does NOT include the Type, Sub Type, and Length fields.
Opaque    Zero or more octets of data, with structure defined only by the particular experiment it is used for.
As the length field is 16 bits wide, the extension data can exceed 256 bytes in length.
Non skippable ICMP Router Discovery Exp.
This format is applicable for non skippable extensions. 0
Length   Indicates the length (in bytes) of the data field within this extension.
It does NOT include the Type and Length fields.
Opaque   Zero or more octets of data, with structure defined only by the particular experiment it is used for.
A node that receives a router advertisement with this extension should ignore the extension if it does not recognize it.
A mobility entity that understands this extension but does not recognize it should drop (ignore) the router advertisement.
Skippable Mobile IPv4 Experimental Extension
This format is applicable for skippable extensions, which carry information less than 256 bytes. 0
Length   Indicates the length (in bytes) of the data field within this extension.
It does NOT include the Type and Length fields.
Sub Type A unique number given to each member in the aggregated type.
Opaque   Zero or more octets of data, with structure defined only by the particular experiment it is used for.
As the length field is 8 bits wide, the extension data cannot exceed 256 bytes in length.
Skippable ICMP Router Discovery Experimental Extension
This format is applicable for skippable ICMP router discovery extensions.
This extension should be ignored if an implementation does not understand it. 0
Length   Indicates the length (in bytes) of the data field within this extension.
It does NOT include the Type and Length fields.
Opaque   Zero or more octets of data, with structure defined only by the particular experiment it is used for.
This document reserves the reply error code EXP FA ERROR CODE for use by the FA.
This document also reserves the reply error code EXP HA  ERROR CODE for use by the HA.
These experimental error codes may be used in registration reply messages.
It is recommended that experimental error codes be used with experimental messages and extensions whenever none of the standardized error codes are applicable.
Mobility Entity Considerations Mobility entities can send and receive experimental messages.
Implementations that don't understand the message type SHOULD silently discard the message.
Experimental extensions can be carried in experimental messages and standards defined messages.
In the latter case, it is suggested that experimental extensions MUST NOT be used in deployed products and that usage be restricted to experiments only.
This document defines a control message to be used between mobility entities, two new extension formats, and two new error codes.
To ensure correct interoperation based on this specification, IANA has reserved values in the Mobile IPv4 number space, as defined in [2], for one new message type, two new extensions, and two error codes.
A new Mobile IPv4 control message using UDP port 434, type 255 (EXP  MSG TYPE), has been defined by IANA.
This value has been taken from the same number space as Mobile IP Registration Request (Type   1) and Mobile IP Registration Reply (Type   3).
The following extension types are introduced by this specification:
The value 127 (EXP NONSKIP  EXT TYPE) has been assigned from the numbering space for non  skippable extensions, which may appear in Mobile IPv4 control messages.
Also, the same number, 127 (EXP NONSKIP EXT TYPE), has been assigned from the numbering space for non skippable extensions, which may appear in ICMP router discovery messages.
The value 255 (EXP SKIP EXT TYPE) has been assigned from the numbering space for skippable extensions, which may appear in Mobile IPv4 control messages.
Also, the same number, 255 (EXP SKIP EXT TYPE), has been assigned from the numbering space for skippable extensions, which may appear in ICMP router discovery messages.
The value 192 (EXP HA ERROR CODE) has been defined by IANA to be used as a code field in messages generated by HA.
Also, the value 127 (EXP FA ERROR CODE) has been defined by IANA to be used as the code field in messages generated by the FA.
Security Considerations Like all Mobile IP control messages
, the experimental messages MUST be authenticated per the requirements specified in [2] or [5].
Experimental messages without a valid authenticator SHOULD be discarded.
Backward Compatibility Considerations Mobility entities that don't understand the experimental message MUST silently discard it.
Mobility entities that don't understand the experimental skippable extensions MUST ignore them.
Mobility entities that don't understand the non skippable experimental extensions MUST silently discard the message containing them.
This behavior is consistent with section 1.8 of [2].
Foreign Agents and Home Agents SHOULD include an experimental error code in a reply message only if they have a general indication that the receiving entity would be able to parse it.
This is indicated if the request message was of type EXP MSG TYPE or contained at least one experimental extension.
