Abstract IANA assigns values to the Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP)
IANA established a top level registry to contain all PCEP codepoints and sub registries.
This top level registry contains sub registries for PCEP message, object, and TLV types.
The allocation policy for each of these sub registries is IETF Review.
This document updates RFC 5440 by changing the allocation policies for these three registries to mark some of the codepoints as assigned for Experimental Use.
The Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP)
[RFC5440] provides mechanisms for Path Computation Elements (PCEs) to perform path computations in response to Path Computation Client (PCC) requests.
Further, in order to support use cases described in [RFC8051], [RFC8231] specifies a set of extensions to PCEP to enable stateful control of MPLS TE and GMPLS LSPs via PCEP.
[RFC8281] describes the setup, maintenance, and teardown of PCE initiated LSPs under the stateful PCE model.
In Section 9 of [RFC5440], IANA assigns values to the PCEP protocol parameters (messages, objects, TLVs).
IANA established a top level registry to contain all PCEP codepoints and sub registries.
This top level registry contains sub registries for PCEP message, object and TLV types.
The allocation policy for each of these sub
registries is IETF Review [RFC8126].
Also, early allocation [RFC7120] provides some latitude for allocation of these codepoints but is reserved for features that are considered appropriately stable.
Recently, there have been rapid advancements in PCE technology, which has created an enhanced need to experiment with PCEP.
It is often necessary to use some sort of number or constant in order to actually test or experiment with the new function, even when testing in a closed environment.
In order to run experiments, it is important that the value not collide with existing codepoints or any future allocations.
This document updates [RFC5440] by changing the allocation policies for these three registries to mark some of the codepoints as assigned for Experimental Use.
As stated in [RFC3692], experiments using these codepoints are not intended to be used in general deployments, and due care must be taken to ensure that two experiments using the same codepoints are not run in the same environment.
See [RFC3692] for further discussion of the use of experimental codepoints (also referred to as "experimental and testing numbers").
Experimental PCEP Messages PCEP message types are in the range 0 to 255.
This document sets aside message types 252 255 for experimentation as described in Section 6.1.
Experimental PCEP Objects PCEP objects are identified by values in the range 0 to 255.
This document sets aside object identifiers 248 255 for experimentation as described in Section 6.2. 4.
Experimental PCEP TLVs PCEP TLV type codes are in the range 0 to 65535.
This document sets aside object identifiers 65504 65535 for experimentation as described in Section 6.2.
Handling of Unknown Experimentation A PCEP implementation that receives an experimental PCEP message that it does not recognize reacts by sending a PCErr message with Error Type 2 (capability not supported) per Section 6.9 of [RFC5440].
If a PCEP speaker does not understand or support an experimental object, then the way it handles this situation depends on the message type.
For example, a PCE handles an unknown object in the Path Computation Request (PCReq) message according to the rules of [RFC5440].
Message specific behavior may be specified (e.g., [RFC8231] defines rules for a PCC to handle an unknown object in a Path Computation LSP Update Request (PCUpd) message).
As per Section 7.1 of [RFC5440], an unknown experimental PCEP TLV would be ignored.
IANA Considerations IANA maintains the "Path Computation Element Protocol (PCEP) Numbers" registry at <http://www.iana.org/assignments/pcep
PCEP Messages Within the PCEP Numbers registry, IANA maintains the "PCEP Messages" sub registry.
IANA has changed the registration procedure for this registry to read as follows: 0 251
252 255 Experimental Use IANA has also marked the values 252 255 in the registry accordingly.
PCEP Objects Within the PCEP Numbers registry
, IANA maintains the "PCEP Objects" sub registry.
IANA has changed the registration procedure for this registry to read as follows: 0
248 255 Experimental Use IANA has also marked the values 248 255 in the registry accordingly, and Object Types 0 15 have been marked for Experimental Use.
PCEP TLVs Within the PCEP Numbers registry, IANA maintains the "PCEP TLV Type Indicators" sub registry.
IANA has changed the registration procedure for this registry to read as follows: 0 65503
65535 Experimental Use IANA has also marked the values 65504 65535 in the registry accordingly.
This document does not introduce any new security considerations to the existing protocol.
Refer to [RFC5440] for further details of the specific security measures.
[RFC3692] asserts that the existence of experimental codepoints introduce no new security considerations.
However, implementations accepting experimental codepoints need to take care in how they parse and process the messages, objects, and TLVs in case they come, accidentally, from another experiment.
Further, an implementation accepting experimental codepoints needs to consider the security aspects of the experimental extensions.
[RFC6709] provides various design considerations for protocol extensions (including those designated as experimental).
Based on feedback from the PCE WG, it was decided to allocate an Experimental codepoint range only in the message, object, and TLV sub registries.
The justification for this decision is that, if an experiment finds that it wants to use a new codepoint in another PCEP sub registry, it can implement the same function using a new experimental object or TLV instead.
