Abstract This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) for Uniform Resource Namespace (URN) resources published by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP).
3GPP defines and manages resources that utilize this URN name model.
Management activities for these and other resource types are provided by the 3GPP Support Team.
Introduction 3GPP is a cooperation of international telecommunication standards bodies developing technologies for cellular networks.
This activity is supported by a membership composed of network operators, equipment vendors, content providers, and other suppliers to the mobile market.
Some of the technologies being developed by 3GPP need URN namespaces that are managed so that they are unique and persistent.
To assure that the uniqueness is absolute, the registration of a specific NID for use by 3GPP was deemed appropriate.
Therefore, a full and complete registration will follow the namespace specification process as defined in RFC 3406
2.  URN Specification for the 3GPP Namespace Identifier (NID)
16 Declared registrant of the namespace:
ETSI Mobile Competence Centre 650, route des Luciole 06921
Sophia Antipolis Cedex France Designated contact Role:
john.meredith@etsi.org Declaration of syntactic structure: The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the "3gpp" NID will have the following structure: urn:3gpp:{3gpp urn} where the "3gpp urn" is a US ASCII string that conforms to the NSS(Namespace Specific String) Syntax described in RFC 2141 [RFC2141] and defines a specific resource type.
3GPP provides information on registration for each URN.
More information about 3GPP and the registration activities and procedures to be followed are available at: http://www.3gpp.org/tb/Other/URN/URN.htm
Identifier uniqueness considerations: 3GPP will manage resources using the "3gpp" NID and will be the authority for managing the "3gpp urn" strings.
In the associated procedures, 3GPP will ensure the uniqueness of the strings themselves or shall permit secondary responsibility for management of well defined sub trees.
3GPP may permit use of experimental type values that will not be registered.
As a consequence, multiple users may end up using the same value for separate uses.
Unregistered type values will only be allowed in sub namespaces clearly marked as experimental, to help implementors avoid "leaking" experimental values into real use.
Identifier persistence considerations: 3GPP will provide clear documentation of the registered uses of the "3gpp" NID.
This will be structured such that each "3gpp  urn", if needed, will have a separate description and registration table.
The registration tables and information will be published and maintained by 3GPP on its web site.
Process of identifier assignment: 3GPP will provide procedures for registration of each type of resource that it maintains.
Each such resource may have three types of registration activities: 1.
Registered values associated with 3GPP specifications or services 2.
Registration of values or sub trees to other entities 3.
Name models for use in experimental purposes New Namespace Identifier (NID) labels The Entries in the registration table will be the following:
Process for identifier resolution: The namespace is not listed with a Resolution Discovery System (RDS), as this is not relevant.
Rules for Lexical Equivalence: No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence of RFC 2141 [RFC2141] apply.
Conformance with URN Syntax: No special considerations.
URN assignment will be handled by procedures supported and maintained by 3GPP.
The following examples are representative URNs that could be assigned by 3GPP.
They are not actual strings that are assigned.
urn:3gpp:featurephones Defines the "3gpp urn" to be used for "featurephones".
urn:3gpp:acme.foo serv Defines the URN associated with the operator identified by the "3gpp urn" value "acme", which has decided to register and provide information about its service identified by value "foo serv".
The 3rd Generation Partnership Project is developing a variety of enablers and applications.
Some of these require information to be fully specified.
For proper operation, descriptions of the needed information must exist for the URNs and be available in a unique, reliable, and persistent manner.
As 3GPP is ongoing and covers many technical areas, the possibility of binding to various other namespace repositories has been deemed impractical.
Each object or description, as defined in 3GPP, could possibly be related to multiple different other namespaces, so further conflicts of association could occur.
Thus, the intent is to utilize the 3GPP specifications manager as the naming authority for 3GPP defined URNs and its descriptions.
The objects and descriptions required for enablers produced by 3GPP are generally available for use by other organizations.
The 3rd Generation Partnership Project Support Office will provide access and support for name requests by these organizations.
This support can be enabled in a timely and responsive fashion as new objects and descriptions are produced.
There are no security considerations other than those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.
This section registers a new URN NID with the registration provided in Section 2.
3gpp urn" strings are identified by label managed by 3GPP.
Thus, creating a new label does not require any IANA action.
