Abstract This document specifies an extension to the identifiers to be used in the Transport Profile of Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS TP).
Identifiers that follow IP/MPLS conventions have already been defined.
This memo augments that set of identifiers for MPLS TP management and Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) functions to include identifier information in a format typically used by the International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU T).
This document augments the initial set of identifiers to be used in the Transport Profile of Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS TP) defined in [RFC6370] by adding new identifiers based on ITU T conventions.
It is not intended that both types of identifiers will be used at the same time in the same domain.
[RFC6370] defines a set of MPLS TP transport and management entity identifiers to support bidirectional (co routed and associated) point to point MPLS TP Label Switched Paths (LSPs), including Pseudowires (PWs) and Sections that follow the IP/MPLS conventions.
This document specifies an alternative way to generate unambiguous identifiers for operators/service providers based on ITU T conventions and specifies how these operator/service provider identifiers can be used to generate unambiguous identifiers for the existing set of identifiable MPLS TP entities described in [RFC6370].
This document solely defines those identifiers.
Their use and possible protocol extensions to carry them are out of the scope of this document.
In this document, we follow the notational convention laid out in [RFC6370], which is included in this document for convenience in Section 1.3.
ITU Carrier Code ISO: International Organization for Standardization ITU: International Telecommunication Union
ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector LSP: Label Switched Path MEG: Maintenance Entity Group MEP:
Maintenance Entity Group Intermediate Point MPLS:
Unique MEG ID Code 1.2.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
This document uses the notational conventions laid out in [RFC6370]:
Many of the identifiers are composed of a set of other identifiers.
These are expressed by listing the latter identifiers joined with double colon "::
For example, A1 Node ID is the Node ID of a node referred to as A1.
The notation defines a preferred ordering of the fields.
Specifically, the designation A1 is used to indicate the lower sort order of a field or set of fields and Z9 is used to indicate the higher sort order of the same.
The sort is either alphanumeric or numeric depending on the field's definition.
Note, however, that the uniqueness of an identifier does not depend on the ordering, but rather, upon the uniqueness and scoping of the fields that compose the identifier.
This document provides additional identifiers supplementing those defined in [RFC6370].
The identifiers in [RFC6370] are composed of a set of atomic identifiers, and this document defines some new atomic identifiers that can be substituted for some of those that have already been defined, to create new identifiers.
The set of identifiers defined in [RFC6370] is:  Global ID
The following sections go through this list of identifiers one by one.
The structure of this document is loosely aligned with the structure of [RFC6370].
In [RFC6370], an operator is uniquely identified by the Global ID, which is based on the Autonomous System (AS) number of the operator.
The ITU T, however, traditionally identifies operators and service providers based on the ITU Carrier Code (ICC) as specified in [M1400].
The ITU T Telecommunication Standardization Bureau (TSB) maintains a list of assigned ICCs [ICC list].
Note that ICCs, all of which are referenced at [ICC list], can be assigned to ITU T members as well as non members.
The national regulatory authorities act as an intermediary between the ITU/TSB and operators/service providers.
One of the things that the national authorities are responsible for in the process of assigning an ICC is to ensure that the Carrier Codes are unique within their country.
This uniqueness assumption is the basis for creating a globally unique ICC based operator ID.
The ICC itself is a string of one to six characters, each character being either alphabetic (i.e., A Z) or numeric (i.e., 0 9).
Alphabetic characters in the ICC SHOULD be represented with uppercase letters.
Global uniqueness is assured by concatenating the ICC with a Country Code (CC).
The Country Code (alpha 2) is a string of two alphabetic characters represented with uppercase letters (i.e., A Z).
The International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) establishes internationally recognized codes for the representation of names of countries, territories or areas of geographical interest, and their subdivisions, published as a list of CCs [CC list] in ISO Standard 3166 1
The ICC and CC characters are coded according to ITU T Recommendation T.50 [T.50].
Together, the CC and the ICC form the ICC Operator ID as: CC::ICC 3.1.
Use of the ICC Operator ID
The ICC Operator ID is used as a replacement for the Global ID as specified in [RFC6370], i.e., its purpose is to provide a globally unique context for other MPLS TP identifiers.
As an example, an Interface Identifier (IF ID) in [RFC6370] is specified as the concatenation of the Node ID (a unique 32 bit value assigned by the operator) and the Interface Number (IF Num, a 32 bit unsigned integer assigned by the operator that is unique within the scope of a Node ID).
To make this IF ID globally unique, the Global ID is prefixed.
This memo specifies the ICC Operator ID as an alternative format that, just like the Global ID, is prefixed to the IF ID.
Using the notation from RFC 6370
Global ID::Node ID::IF Num is functionally equivalent to: ICC Operator ID::Node
The same substitution procedure applies to all identifiers specified in [RFC6370] with the exception of the MEG ID, MEP ID, and MIP ID.
MEG, MEP, and MIP Identifiers are redefined in this document (see Sections 7.1, 7.2, and 7.3, respectively).
The format of the Node and Interface Identifiers are not changed by this memo except for the case when global uniqueness is required.
[RFC6370] defines the Node Identifier (Node ID) as a unique 32 bit value assigned by the operator within the scope of a Global ID.
The structure of the Node ID itself is not defined as it is left to the operator to choose an appropriate value.
The value zero, however, is reserved and MUST NOT be used.
This document does not change the above definition.
However, in case global uniqueness is required, the Node ID is prefixed with the ICC Operator ID as defined in Section 3.
[RFC6370] further defines interface numbers (IF Num) as 32 bit unsigned integers that can be freely assigned by the operator and must be unique in the scope of the respective Node ID.
The IF Num value 0
has a special meaning, and therefore, it MUST NOT be used to identify an MPLS TP interface.
An Interface Identifier (IF ID) identifies an interface uniquely within the context of an ICC Operator ID.
It is formed by concatenating the Node ID with the IF Num to result in a 64 bit identifier formed as Node ID::IF Num.
Global uniqueness of the IF ID, if needed, can be assured by prefixing the identifier with the ICC Operator ID.
MPLS TP Tunnel and LSP Identifiers
This document does not change the definition for local Tunnel and LSP IDs.
When global uniqueness is needed, the format of these identifiers is as described in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.
MPLS TP Point to Point Tunnel Identifiers Tunnel IDs (Tunnel ID)
are based on the end points' Node IDs and locally assigned tunnel numbers (Tunnel Num), which identify the tunnel at each end point.
The tunnel number is a 16 bit unsigned integer unique within the context of the Node ID.
A full Tunnel ID is represented by the concatenation of these two end point specific identifiers.
Using the A1/Z9 convention, the format of a Tunnel ID is: A1 {Node ID::Tunnel Num}::Z9
{Node ID::Tunnel Num} Where global uniqueness is required, using ITU T conventions
, the ICC Operator ID is prefixed to the Tunnel ID.
Thus, a globally unique Tunnel ID becomes: A1 {ICC Operator ID::Node ID::Tunnel Num}:: Z9
As per [RFC6370], when an MPLS TP tunnel is configured, it MUST be assigned a unique IF ID at each end point as defined in Section 4.
The following subsections define identifiers for MPLS TP co routed bidirectional and associated bidirectional LSPs.
TP Sub Path Maintenance Entities (SPMEs) are also LSPs, they use the same form of IDs.
The LSP Identifier (LSP ID) for a co routed bidirectional LSP is formed by adding a 16 bit unsigned integer LSP number (LSP Num) to the Tunnel ID.
Consequently, the format of an MPLS TP
co routed bidirectional LSP ID is: A1 {Node ID::Tunnel
Num}::Z9 {Node ID::Tunnel Num}::LSP Num [RFC6370] notes that the "uniqueness of identifiers does not depend on the A1/Z9 sort ordering".
A co routed bidirectional LSP is provisioned or signaled as a single entity, and therefore, a single LSP Num is used for both unidirectional LSPs.
These can be referenced by the following identifiers:
A1 Node ID::A1 Tunnel Num::LSP Num::Z9 Node ID and Z9 Node ID::Z9
Tunnel Num::LSP Num::A1 Node ID, respectively.
Global uniqueness is accomplished by using globally unique Node IDs.
A globally unique LSP ID consequently becomes: A1 {ICC Operator ID::Node
ID::Tunnel Num}:: Z9 {ICC Operator
MPLS TP Associated Bidirectional LSP Identifiers
An associated bidirectional LSP needs a separate LSP Num for both of its unidirectional LSPs.
The LSP number is again a 16 bit unsigned integer that needs to be unique within the scope of the ingress's Tunnel Num.
Consequently, the format of an MPLS TP associated bidirectional LSP ID
is: A1 {Node ID::Tunnel Num::LSP Num}::
Z9 {Node ID::Tunnel Num::LSP Num} Each of the unidirectional LSPs of which the associated bidirectional LSP is composed may be referenced by one of the following identifiers:
A1 Node ID::A1 Tunnel Num::A1 LSP Num::Z9 Node ID and
Tunnel Num::Z9 LSP Num::A1 Node ID, respectively.
A globally unique LSP ID is constructed using the globally unique Node IDs as defined before.
Consequently, a globally unique LSP ID is formulated as: A1 {ICC Operator ID::Node ID::Tunnel Num::LSP Num}::
The PW Path Identifier (PW Path ID) is structured in a similar manner as the PW Path ID described in Section 6 of [RFC6370].
Instead of the Global ID used in [RFC6370], this document uses the ICC Operator ID to make the PW Path ID globally unique.
In this document, the Attachment Individual Identifier (AII) is composed of three fields.
These are the ICC Operator ID, the Node ID, and the AC ID.
The AC ID is as defined in [RFC5003].
The complete globally unique PW Path ID is formulated as: A1 {ICC Operator ID::Node
ID::AC ID}:: Z9 {ICC Operator ID::Node
The following subsections define the identifiers for the various maintenance related groups and entities as defined in [RFC6371].
In contrast to the IDs defined in [RFC6370], this document does not define separate maintenance identifiers for Sections, PWs, and LSPs.
MEG Identifiers MEG IDs for MPLS TP Sections, LSPs, and PWs following ITU T conventions are based on the globally unique ICC Operator ID.
In this case, the MEG ID is a string of up to 15 characters and consists of three subfields:
the Country Code (as described in Section 3) and the ICC (as described in Section 3)   which together form the ICC Operator ID   followed by a Unique MEG ID Code (UMC) as defined in [Y.1731 cor1].
This way, the MEG ID can also be easily decomposed into its individual components by a receiver.
The UMC MUST be unique within the organization identified by the combination of CC and ICC.
The ICC Operator ID based MEG ID may be applied equally to a single MPLS TP Section, LSP, or Pseudowire.
MEP Identifiers ICC Operator ID based MEP IDs for MPLS TP Sections, LSPs, and Pseudowires are formed by appending a 16 bit index to the MEG ID defined in Section 7.1.
Within the context of a particular MEG, we call the identifier associated with a MEP the MEP Index (MEP Index).
The MEP Index is administratively assigned.
It is encoded as a 16 bit unsigned integer and MUST be unique within the MEG.
An ICC Operator ID based MEP ID is structured as: MEG ID::MEP Index
An ICC Operator ID based MEP ID is globally unique by construction given the ICC Operator ID based MEG ID's global uniqueness.
MIP Identifiers ICC Operator ID based MIP IDs for MPLS TP Sections, LSPs, and Pseudowires are formed by a global IF ID that is obtained by prefixing the identifier of the interface on which the MIP resides with the ICC Operator ID as described in Section 3.1.
This allows MIPs to be independently identified in nodes where a per interface MIP model is used.
If only a per node MIP model is used, one MIP is configured.
In this case, the MIP ID is formed by using the Node ID and an IF Num of 0.
This document extends an existing naming scheme and does not introduce new security concerns.
However, as mentioned in the Security Considerations section of [RFC6370], protocol specifications that describe the use of this naming scheme may introduce security risks and concerns about authentication of participants.
For this reason, these protocol specifications need to describe security and authentication concerns that may be raised by the particular mechanisms defined and how those concerns may be addressed.
