Abstract This document provides instructions to IANA for the creation of a registry for PIM message types.
It specifies the initial content of the registry, based on existing RFCs specifying PIM message types.
It also specifies a procedure for registering new types.
In addition to this, one message type is reserved, and may be used for a future extension of the message type space.
Apart from this document, there is no existing document specifying a registry for PIM message types.
PIM version 1 made use of IGMP [RFC1112], and there is an IGMP registry [IGMPREG] listing the message types used by PIM version 1.
PIM version 2, however, is not based on IGMP, and a separate PIM message type registry is needed.
There are currently several RFCs specifying new PIM version 2 message types that should be in this new registry.
They are the RFCs for PIM Dense Mode [RFC3973], PIM Sparse Mode [RFC4601], and Bidirectional PIM [RFC5015].
This document specifies the initial content of the new PIM message type registry, based on those existing RFCs.
This document also specifies a procedure for registering new PIM message types.
In addition to this, this document reserves one message type.
This type may be used for a future extension of the message type space.
The current message type space is only 4 bits, so it is not unlikely that this will be needed.
How exactly the extension should be done is left to a future document.
This document only creates an IANA registry.
There may be a security benefit in a well known place for finding information on which PIM message types are valid and how they are used.
Apart from that, there are no security considerations.
IANA Considerations IANA has created a PIM message type registry.
It has been placed in the "Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM)" branch of the tree.
Each entry in the registry consists of a message type, a message name, and references to the documents defining the type.
The message type is a 4 bit integer with possible values from 0 to 15.
The initial content of the registry should be as follows.
Assignment of New Message Types Assignment of new message types is done according to the "IETF Review" model; see [RFC5226].
