Abstract This document defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in Internet Protocol Version 6 internets.
Specifically, this document is the MIB module that defines managed objects for implementations of the Multicast Listener Discovery Protocol [RFC2710].
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
The SNMP Management Framework presently consists of five major components: An overall architecture, described in RFC 2571
Mechanisms for describing and naming objects and events for the purpose of management.
The first version of this Structure of Management Information (SMI) is called SMIv1 and described in STD 16, RFC 1155
[RFC1155], STD 16, RFC 1212 [RFC1212] and RFC 1215 [RFC1215].
The second version, called SMIv2, is described in STD 58, RFC 2578 [RFC2578], STD 58, RFC 2579
[RFC2579] and STD 58, RFC 2580
Message protocols for transferring management information.
The first version of the SNMP message protocol is called SNMPv1 and described in STD 15, RFC 1157
A second version of the SNMP message protocol, which is not an Internet standards track protocol, is called SNMPv2c and described in RFC 1901
[RFC1901] and RFC 1906 [RFC1906].
The third version of the message protocol is called SNMPv3 and described in RFC 1906
[RFC1906], RFC 2572 [RFC2572] and RFC 2574
Protocol operations for accessing management information.
The first set of protocol operations and associated PDU formats is described in STD 15, RFC 1157 [RFC1157].
A second set of protocol operations and associated PDU formats is described in RFC 1905 [RFC1905].
A set of fundamental applications described in RFC 2573 [RFC2573] and the view based access control mechanism described in RFC 2575
A more detailed introduction to the current SNMP Management Framework can be found in RFC 2570 [RFC2570].
Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed the Management Information Base or MIB.
Objects in the MIB are defined using the mechanisms defined in the SMI.
This memo specifies a MIB module that is compliant to the SMIv2.
A MIB conforming to the SMIv1 can be produced through the appropriate translations.
The resulting translated MIB must be semantically equivalent, except where objects or events are omitted because no translation is possible (use of Counter64).
Some machine readable information in SMIv2 will be converted into textual descriptions in SMIv1 during the translation process.
However, this loss of machine readable information is not considered to change the semantics of the MIB.
This MIB module contains two tables: 1.
The MLD Interface Table, which contains one row for each interface on which MLD is enabled.
The MLD Cache Table which contains one row for each IPv6 Multicast group for which there are members on a particular interface.
Both tables are intended to be implemented by hosts and routers.
Some objects in each table apply to routers only.
FROM IF MIB MODULE COMPLIANCE, OBJECT GROUP  FROM SNMPv2 CONF; mldMIB MODULE IDENTITY LAST UPDATED "200101250000Z"   25 Jan 2001 ORGANIZATION "
" CONTACT INFO " Brian Haberman Nortel Networks 4309
, NC  27703 USA Phone:
: haberman@nortelnetworks.com" DESCRIPTION "The MIB module for MLD Management."
MAX ACCESS not accessible STATUS
current DESCRIPTION "The (conceptual) table listing the interfaces on which MLD is enabled."
MAX ACCESS not accessible STATUS
An entry (conceptual row) representing an interface on which MLD is enabled."
InterfaceIndex MAX ACCESS not accessible STATUS
The internetwork layer interface value of the interface for which MLD is enabled."
} mldInterfaceStatus OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
"The activation of a row enables MLD on the interface.
The destruction of a row disables MLD on the interface."
"The version of MLD which is running on this interface.
This object is a place holder to allow for new versions of MLD to be introduced.
Version 1 of MLD is defined in RFC 2710.
"The maximum query response time advertised in MLD queries on this interface.
"The number of times a group membership has been added on this interface; that is, the number of times an entry for this interface has been added to the Cache Table.
This object gives an indication of the amount of MLD activity over time."
The Robustness Variable allows tuning for the expected packet loss on a subnet.
If a subnet is expected to be lossy, the Robustness Variable may be increased.
MLD is robust to (Robustness Variable 1) packet losses.
The discussion of the Robustness Variable is in Section 7.1 of RFC 2710.
The Last Member Query Interval is the Max Response Delay inserted into Group Specific Queries sent in response to Leave Group messages, and is also the amount of time between Group Specific Query messages.
This value may be tuned to modify the leave latency of the network.
A reduced value results in reduced time to detect the loss of the last member of a group."
"Some devices implement a form of MLD proxying whereby memberships learned on the interface represented by this row, cause MLD Multicast Listener Reports to be sent on the internetwork layer interface identified by this object.
Such a device would implement mldRouterMIBGroup only on its router interfaces (those interfaces with non zero mldInterfaceProxyIfIndex).
Typically, the value of this object is 0, indicating that no proxying is being done."
"The time remaining before the Other Querier Present Timer expires.
If the local system is the querier, the value of this object is zero."
MAX ACCESS not accessible STATUS
current DESCRIPTION "The (conceptual) table listing the IPv6 multicast groups for which there are members on a particular interface."
MAX ACCESS not accessible STATUS
An entry (conceptual row) in the mldCacheTable."
MAX ACCESS not accessible STATUS
"The IPv6 multicast group address for which this entry contains information."
InterfaceIndex MAX ACCESS not accessible STATUS
current DESCRIPTION "The internetwork layer interface for which this entry contains information for an IPv6 multicast group address."
"An indication of whether the local system is a member of this group address on this interface."
The IPv6 address of the source of the last membership report received for this IPv6 Multicast group address on this interface.
If no membership report has been received, this object has the value 0::0."
The time elapsed since this entry was created."
The minimum amount of time remaining before this entry will be aged out.
A value of 0 indicates that the entry is only present because mldCacheSelf is true and that if the router left the group, this entry would be aged out immediately.
Note that some implementations may process Membership Reports from the local system in the same way as reports from other hosts, so a value of 0 is not required."
"The status of this row, by which new entries may be created, or existing entries deleted from this table."
MODULE COMPLIANCE STATUS  current DESCRIPTION
"The compliance statement for hosts running MLD and implementing the MLD MIB."
MODULE    this module MANDATORY GROUPS { mldBaseMIBGroup, mldHostMIBGroup } OBJECT
mldInterfaceStatus MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION
"Write access is not required."
MODULE    this module MANDATORY GROUPS { mldBaseMIBGroup, mldRouterMIBGroup } OBJECT
mldInterfaceStatus MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION
"Write access is not required."
OBJECT GROUP OBJECTS { mldCacheSelf, mldCacheStatus, mldInterfaceStatus } STATUS  current DESCRIPTION
"The basic collection of objects providing management of MLD.
The mldBaseMIBGroup is designed to allow for the manager creation and deletion of MLD cache entries."
A collection of additional objects for management of MLD in routers."
OBJECT GROUP OBJECTS { mldInterfaceQuerier } STATUS  current DESCRIPTION
This MIB contains readable objects whose values provide information related to multicast sessions.
Some of these objects could contain sensitive information.
In particular, the mldCacheSelf and mldCacheLastReporter could be used to identify machines which are listening to a given group address.
There are also a number of objects that have a MAX ACCESS clause of read write and/or read  create, which allow an administrator to configure MLD in the router.
While unauthorized access to the readable objects is relatively innocuous, unauthorized access to the write
able objects could cause a denial of service.
Hence, the support of SET operations in a non  secure environment without proper protection can have a negative effect on network operations.
by itself is such an insecure environment.
Even if the network itself is secure (for example by using IPSec), even then, there is no control as to who on the network is allowed to access and SET (change/create/delete)
the objects in this MIB.
It is recommended that the implementers consider the security features as provided by the SNMPv3 framework.
Specifically, the use of the User based Security Model RFC 2574
[RFC2574] and the View  based Access Control Model RFC 2575
It is then a customer/user responsibility to ensure that the SNMP entity giving access to this MIB, is properly configured to give access to those objects only to those principals (users) that have legitimate rights to access them.
