Abstract The IP Security Authentication Header (AH) and Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) protocols use a sequence number to detect replay.
This document describes extensions to the Internet IP Security Domain of Interpretation (DOI) for the Internet Security Association and Key Management Protocol (ISAKMP).
These extensions support negotiation of the use of traditional 32 bit sequence numbers or extended (64  bit) sequence numbers (ESNs) for a particular AH or ESP security association.
The specifications for the IP Authentication Header (AH) [AH] and the IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)
[ESP] describe an option for use of extended (64 bit) sequence numbers.
This option permits transmission of very large volumes of data at high speeds over an IPsec Security Association, without rekeying to avoid sequence number space exhaustion.
This document describes the additions to the IPsec DOI for ISAKMP [DOI] that are needed to support negotiation of the extended sequence number (ESN) option.
The keywords MUST, MUST NOT, REQUIRED, SHALL,
SHALL NOT, SHOULD, SHOULD NOT, RECOMMENDED, MAY, and OPTIONAL, when they appear in this document, are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [Bra97].
The following SA attribute definition is used in Phase II of an Internet Key Exchange Protocol (IKE) negotiation.
The attribute type is Basic (B).
Encoding of this attribute is defined in the base ISAKMP specification [ISAKMP].
Attributes described as basic MUST NOT be encoded as variable.
See [IKE] for further information on attribute encoding in the IPsec DOI.
All restrictions listed in [IKE] also apply to the IPsec DOI and to this addendum.
This class specifies that the Security Association will be using 64 bit sequence numbers.
(See [AH] and [ESP] for a description of extended (64 bit) sequence numbers.)
If an implementation receives a defined IPsec DOI attribute (or attribute value) that it does not support, an ATTRIBUTES
NOT SUPPORT SHOULD be sent and the security association setup MUST be aborted.
If an implementation receives any attribute value but the value for 64 bit sequence numbers, the security association setup MUST be aborted.
This memo pertains to the Internet Key Exchange protocol [IKE], which combines ISAKMP [ISAKMP] and Oakley [OAKLEY] to provide for the derivation of cryptographic keying material in a secure and authenticated manner.
Specific discussion of the various security protocols and transforms identified in this document can be found in the associated base documents and in the cipher references.
The addition of the ESN attribute does not change the underlying security characteristics of IKE.
In using ESNs with ESP, it is important to employ an encryption mode that is secure when very large volumes of data are encrypted under a single key.
Thus, for example, Data Encryption Standard (DES) in Cipher Block Chaining
(CBC) mode would NOT be suitable for use with the ESN, because no more than 2^32 blocks should be encrypted under a single DES key in that mode.
Similarly, the integrity algorithm used with ESP or AH should be secure relative to the number of packets being protected.
To avoid potential security problems imposed by algorithm limitations, the SA lifetime may be set to limit the volume of data protected with a single key, prior to reaching the 2^64 packet limit imposed by the ESN.
This document contains a "magic" number to be maintained by the IANA.
No additional class values will be assigned for this attribute.
The IANA has allocated an IPsec Security Attribute value for "Attribute Type".
This value is listed under the heading "value" in the table in Section 2.
