Abstract This document specifies authentication only ciphersuites (with no encryption) for the Pre Shared Key (PSK) based Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol.
These ciphersuites are useful when authentication and integrity protection is desired, but confidentiality is not needed or not permitted.
The RFC for Pre Shared Key (PSK)
based Transport Layer Security (TLS)
[TLS PSK] specifies ciphersuites for supporting TLS using
However, all the ciphersuites defined in [TLS PSK] require encryption.
However there are cases when only authentication and integrity protection is required, and confidentiality is not needed.
There are also cases when confidentiality is not permitted e.g., for implementations that must meet import restrictions in some countries.
Even though no encryption is used, these ciphersuites support authentication of the client and server to each other, and message integrity.
This document augments [TLS PSK] by adding three more ciphersuites (PSK, DHE PSK, RSA PSK) with authentication and integrity only no encryption.
The reader is expected to become familiar with [TLS PSK] standards prior to studying this document.
The ciphersuites defined in this document are intended for a rather limited set of applications, usually involving only a very small number of clients and servers.
Even in such environments, other alternatives may be more appropriate.
If the main goal is to avoid Public key Infrastructures (PKIs), another possibility worth considering is using self signed certificates with public key fingerprints.
Instead of manually configuring a shared secret in, for instance, some configuration file, a fingerprint (hash) of the other party's public key (or certificate) could be placed there instead.
It is also possible to use the Secure Remote Password (SRP) ciphersuites for shared secret authentication [SRP].
SRP was designed to be used with passwords, and it incorporates protection against dictionary attacks.
However, it is computationally more expensive than the PSK ciphersuites in [TLS PSK].
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
The three new ciphersuites proposed here match the three cipher suites defined in [TLS PSK], except that we define suites with null encryption.
Hash TLS PSK WITH NULL
SHA TLS DHE PSK WITH NULL
For the meaning of the terms PSK, please refer to section 1 in [TLS  PSK].
For the meaning of the terms DHE, RSA, and SHA, please refer to appendixes A.5 and B in [TLS].
As with all schemes involving shared keys, special care should be taken to protect the shared values and to limit their exposure over time.
As this document augments [TLS PSK], everything stated in its Security Consideration section applies here.
In addition, as cipher suites defined here do not support confidentiality, care should be taken not to send sensitive information (such as passwords) over connections protected with one of the ciphersuites defined in this document.
This document defines three new ciphersuites whose values are in the TLS Cipher Suite registry defined in [TLS].
