Catalogue of Network Training Materials Produced as a collaborative effort by the Joint IETF/TERENA(RARE) Network Training Materials Working Group (TRAINMAT) Status of this Memo
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
Abstract The purpose of this document is to provide a catalogue of quality Network Training Materials for use by Internet trainers in training their users.
By providing such a collection of pointers to useful resources, it is hoped that trainers will be relieved of much of the load of producing current training materials.
How the information was collected .
4 Internet Passport: NorthWestNet's Guide to Our World Online .
Emily Postnews Answers Your Questions on Netiquette .
9 Course Notes and Exercises: Networked Information Services 1:
A Cruise of the Internet  .
14 The Whole Internet User's Guide and Catalogue
. 15 Network Training Pack .
An Introduction to Using the Internet at St. Louis University School of Law .
. . 18 "Where to Start" for New Internet Users .
25 University of Washington Internet training  .
Learning and Teaching to Transfer . .
The Video Guide to the Internet .
Crossing the Internet Threshold, 2nd ed.
34 Internet Training and Tutorials .
Notes on completing the TrainMat template .
As the range of information and services on the Internet expands, so does the potential user population.
Given the significant investment in the network and the various networked information and data services, it is essential that the broad spectrum of potential users are made aware of these services.
In particular they require training in using these facilities and in making effective use of the tools available for searching for and retrieving information available on the global network.
The rapid expansion of the user base has made it difficult for network trainers to keep up with the demand for training.
Librarians, Computing Service staff and subject based Network Support staff all have a vital role to play in training users.
Easy access to quality network training materials and the pooling of resources will help spread the load.
The purpose of this document is to provide a catalogue of quality Network Training Materials for use by Internet trainers.
By providing such a collection of pointers to useful resources, it is hoped that trainers will be relieved of much of the load of producing current training materials.
The intention is to make this a "living document".
It will be held on line so that each section may be updated separately as appropriate.
How the information was collected The information contained in this report was collected over the network by volunteers from the Trainmat Working Group from the contacts for each network training resource using the Trainmat template (see Appendix A).
The contents of this template had been discussed by the Trainmat WG at its meetings and on the mailing list.
The decision on whether or not to include an item was made by the members of the working group.
This catalogue covers network training materials.
These are categorised as follows:
Presentation Material:  including OHP masters, speaker's hand outs and speaker's notes
Some material such as selected User Guides, Resource Guides and Trainer Guides are of particular use to trainers and have been included as appropriate.
The resource lists included are those assembled for training purposes and those frequently used or referred to in training.
Special Online Collections of training materials are now available and a selection of these is included.
The full list of Categories used is: User Guides Resource Guides
Presentation Material Workshop Exercises Self Paced Material Online Collections 4.
The catalogue is available online.
As this will be more up to date than the RFC version, the online version should be used as the basis for any updates.
The WWW version of the document provides a mechanism, through an HTML form, to send updates (and new material) to the maintainers of this catalogue.
To access the document online you may use the World Wide Web using: http://www.trainmat.ietf.org/catalogue.html http://www.trainmat.ietf.org/template.html Updates to the catalogue are welcome and can be made by either completing a template and sending it to "catalogue@connect.com.au" or (preferably) by using the HTML form on
the World Wide Web http://www.trainmat.ietf.org/form.html The new and revised entries are reviewed by a small international editorial board made up of TRAINMAT volunteers.
The updating of the catalogue is done on a best effort basis and is subject to review.
This section contains the completed templates of network training material, as received by the publication date of this document.
The online versions of this document may have more up to date material.
The material falls into the following broad categories (see also section 3): User Guides Resource Guides Trainer Guides Presentation material Workshop exercises
Self paced material On Line Collections Template Type:
Internet Passport: NorthWestNet's Guide to Our World
NorthWestNet Organization Address: 15400 SE 30th Place, Suite 202 Bellevue
, WA 98007 Audience Level:
Internet; Network services; OPACs, databases; Usenet News; electronic mail, WWW, gopher, ftp, archie, telnet, WAIS, directory services, electronic publications, information provision, security, health care, K 12, supercomputing.
Step by step manual, covering the current tools and resources of the Internet with explanations by information professionals and experienced Internet trainers.
Latest Revision Date: January 1995
Cost: US 29.95 Access Type: www URL:
http://www.nwnet.net/passport> Access Type: printed guide
Publisher Phone: Size: 667 pp.
Information on ordering is available from: http://www.nwnet.net/homepage/abtpassport/passhome.html Record Last
Verified Date: October, 1995 Record Last Modified Date: October, 1995 Record Last
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
The Net: User Guidelines and Netiquette Author Name:
Rinaldi, Arlene H. Author Email: rinaldi@acc.fau.edu
Organization Name: Information Resource Management, Florida Atlantic University
JA Japanese Keywords: netiquette; network applications; Usenet;
Guide to responsible practice in making use of network services.
Gives guidelines in areas of telnet, ftp, e mail, Listserv groups, mailing lists, Usenet, plus "The Ten Commandments for Computer Ethics."
Latest Revision Date: January 1996 Cost: free Access Type:
The translated versions may not necessarily have the same `Lastest Version' date as the original.
February 1996 Record Last Modified Date:
February 1996 Record Last Modified Name:
Wright, Emma F. Record Last Modified Email:
Your Questions on Netiquette Author Name: Templeton, Brad Author Email: brad@clarinet.com
Audience Level: Intermediate Language: EN English Language:
FR French Keywords: advice, netiquette,
satire Description: Lessons about network etiquette through advice on good practice, heavily laden with irony.
Contact Name: Templeton, Brad Contact Address:
May 1995 Cost: free Access Type:
February 1996 Record Last Modified Date:
February 1996 Record Last Modified Name:
Wright, Emma F. Record Last Modified Email:
Surfing the Internet Author Name:
Polly, Jean Armour Author Email:
Description: Overview of the Internet with somewhat of a focus on education.
Includes projects underway and various kinds of services, including bulletin board systems, databases, OPACS, listservs, and muses.
Gives contacts for getting connected and discusses common Internet tools.
Magazine article, which is included in the ftp file, is a non technical introduction to the Internet without the specific information given in the ftp file.
Polly, Jean Armour Contact Address:
May 1993 Cost: free Access Type:
File Size: 60 K Access Type:
Wilson Library Bulletin Publisher Address:
Publisher Phone: Size: 2 pp.
February 1996 Record Last Modified Date:
February 1996 Record Last Modified Name:
Shepstone, Jon Record Last Modified Email:
A Guide to Electronic Mail
Academic Computing Services Dept, University of Sheffield Organization Address:
Sheffield S10 2TN, UK Audience Level:
e mail; Janet; gateways; names; addresses; networks Description:
Details of using e mail from Sheffield to other sites and networks, including sending files by e mail.
Section on use of gateways.
Contact Name: Brack, Verity Contact Address:
Academic Computing Services University of Sheffield Sheffield
44 114 282 4253 Contact Email:
October 1994 Cost: free Access Type:
V.Brack@sheffield.ac.uk File Size: 222,744 bytes Content Type: Word for Windows Email Command: send a message to Verity Brack asking for ppnotesmail2 Access Type: printed booklet Publisher Name: ACS, University of Sheffield Publisher Address:
Publisher Phone: Size: 39 pages,
October 94 Record Last Modified Date: October 94 Record
Name: Brack, Verity Record Last Modified Email:
Course Notes and Exercises: Networked Information Services 1:
Janet Author Name: Brack, Verity Author Email:
V.Brack@sheffield.ac.uk Organization Name: Academic Computing Services, University of Sheffield Organization Address:
Sheffield S10 2TN, UK Audience Level:
; use; bulletin boards; information services Description:
Notes and exercises covering the use of information services on Janet.
Includes using the NISS gateway, the NISS and BUBL bulletin boards, Janet News, OPACs and the X.500 directory service.
Contact Name: Brack, Verity Contact Address:
Academic Computing Services University of Sheffield Sheffield
44 114 282 4253 Contact Email:
September 1994 Cost: free for non commercial use Access Type:
V.Brack@sheffield.ac.uk File Size: 140,870 bytes Content Type: Word for Windows Email Command: send a message to Verity Brack asking for Access Type:
booklet Publisher Name: Academic Computing Services, University of Sheffield Publisher Address:
Publisher Phone: Size: 8 pages, A4 Reference:
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Name: Brack, Verity Record Last Modified Email:
Trainmat Handle: 61 Category: User Guides
Author Name: Geerlings, Ben; Heijne, Maria; Stals, Bert Author Email:
Utrecht Audience Level: Intermediate Language:
Comprehensive guide to services accessible via SURFnet complete with access details.
Explains in non technical language about networks, e mail, remote login, file transfer, bulletin boards, remote job entry, electronic conferencing, etc.
Contact Name: Geerlings, Ben Contact Address:
SURFnet BV PO Box 19035 3501
31 30 310290 Contact Email:
1994 Cost: free Access Type:
329 K Access Type: book Publisher Name: SURFnet bv
SURFnet BV PO Box 19035 3501
31 30 310290 Size: 265 pp.
01 5 Notes: Special contributions: Janneke Abbema, Xander Jansen, Pien Verhorst Available in Dutch and English, and in ascii, Word Perfect, and postcript formats.
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
A Cruise of the Internet Author Name:
Merit Network Inc. Organization Address:
Merit's "Cruise of the Internet" is a computer based tutorial for new as well as experienced Internet "navigators.
The Cruise will introduce you to Internet resources as diverse as supercomputing, minorities, multimedia, and even cooking.
It will also provide information about the tools needed to access those resources.
Merit Network Inc. Information Services 2901
Hubbard Pod G Ann Arbor MI 48105
cruise2feedback@merit.edu Latest Revision Date: 1992 Cost: free (US$10 for diskette version)
1.5 MB Requirements: This tutorial will run on any IBM DOS or DOS compatible computer which is equipped to display 256 colors at an aspect ratio of 640 x 480.
To run the Cruise tutorial you will need An IBM DOS or DOS compatible computer XGA  or XGA compatible adapter set to display 256 colors at 640 x 480 Microsoft Windows(TM)
version 3.1 running in enhanced mode Approximately 1.5 MB of disk space 2
MB RAM minimum Access Type: ftp URL: <
1.5 MB Requirements: This tutorial will run on any color Macintosh which is capable of displaying 256 colors.
To run the Cruise tutorial you will need A Macintosh II, LC or Quadra series computer 8 bit color and any color monitor (12" minimum) System 6.05 or 7.x Approximately 3 MB of disk space 4 MB RAM is recommended Access Type: disk Publisher Name: Merit Network, Inc.,Information
Services Publisher Address: 2901 Hubbard, Pod G Ann Arbor, MI 48105
Publisher Email: cruise2feedback@merit.edu Size: (1.44MB HD diskette only)
Never Record Last Modified Date: January 96 Record
Mann, Dawn Record Last Modified Email: MANND@AdminA.RFERL.ORG Template Type:
Trainmat Handle: 68 Category: Resource Guides Country:
Information Sources: the Internet and Computer Mediated
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Organization Address: Troy, New York, USA Audience Level:
EN English Keywords: Computer mediated networked communication information Description: The work's purpose is "to list pointers to information describing the Internet, computer networks, and issues related to computer mediated communication (CMC)."
Release 4.05 Cost: Free for non commercial use Access Type: ftp URL:
none Access Type: www URL: <
Record Last Verified Date: January 1995 Record Last Modified Date: February 1996 Record
Scales, Walter Record Last Modified Email:
The Whole Internet User's Guide and Catalogue
O'Reilly & Associates Organization Address: 103 Morris Street, Suite A Sebastapol, CA 95472
: User guide, resource guide, catalog Description:
A guide for both new and experienced users of the Internet.
Utilities such as email, News, ftp are discussed along with some of the newer tools such as WWW, gopher and archie.
A good resource section is provided as well.
Contact Phone:  1 707 829 0515 or (800) 998 9938
Cost: Commercial Access Type: book Publisher Name:
O'Reilly & Associates Publisher Address: 103 Morris Street, Suite A Sebastopol, CA 95472
Publisher Phone:  1 707 829 0515 or (800)
Reference: ISBN 1 56592 063
: September 94 Record Last Modified Date:
February 1996 Record Last Modified Name:
Scales, Walter Record Last Modified Email:
Network Training Materials Project Author Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk Organization Name:
University of Newcastle Organization Address:
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU UK Audience Level:
EN English Keywords: networks, network training, networked information, network services Description:
A mix'n match set of generic training materials comprising presentations with notes, workshop exercises, handout sheets, etc.
Intended to be taken and adapted by trainers in their local training programmes.
Contact Name: Foster, Jill Contact Address: Computing Service University of Newcastle Newcastle upon Tyne
NE1 7RU Contact Phone:  44 191 222 8080
Cost: Free for non commercial use Access Type: ftp URL:
Presentation files for PC Windows or Apple Mac require Microsoft PowerPoint or PowerPoint Viewer to run.
Viewer is available free on this server.
Access Type: gopher URL: <
Presentation files for PC Windows or Apple Mac require Microsoft PowerPoint or PowerPoint Viewer to run.
Viewer is available free on this server.
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
Janet Hunt Author Name: Daniels, Graham Author Email
: lbx001@coventry.ac.uk Organization Name: Bulletin Board for Libraries Organization Address: University of Bath, Bath,
EN English Keywords: JANET, Internet,
Set of quizzes with answers
Contact Name: Daniels, Graham Contact Address:
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
Trainmat Handle: 73 Category: User Guides
Title: An Introduction to Using the Internet at St. Louis University School of Law Author Name:
St Louis University School of Law Library Organization Address:
St Louis, Missouri, USA Audience Level: Intermediate Language:
EN English Keywords: VAX, Pine, Email, telnet, ftp, kermit, Gopher Description: Largely a local document, but
has detailed descriptions of Pine and VAX mail systems.
Also acts as a resource guide for legal information and e mail lists.
Contact Name: Milles, Jim Contact Address:
Unknown Access Type: ftp URL: <
138186 Requirements: Self extracting archive to a WP file Notes:
February 1996 Record Last Modified Date:
February 1996 Record Last Modified Name:
Scales, Walter Record Last Modified Email:
Trainmat Handle: 74 Category: Resource Guides Country:
US United States Title: "Where to Start" for New Internet Users
Saint Louis University School of Law Library Organization Address:
St Louis, Missouri, USA Audience Level: Intermediate Language:
An annotated bibliography of books and ftp documents.
Arranged by category of potential user.
Contact Name: Milles, Jim Contact Address:
: May 94 Cost: Free Access Type:
listserv@ubvm.cc.buffalo.edu File Size: 18095 Content Type:
Text Email Command: get newusers faq nettrain f mail Access Type: ftp URL:
18095 Access Type: www URL: <
February 1996 Record Last Modified Date:
February 1996 Record Last Modified Name:
Scales, Walter Record Last Modified Email:
Title: Introduction to the Internet II
Globewide Network Academy Organization Address: Texas, USA Audience Level:
Distance education, on line courses, catalog, MOO, Internet Description:
Online Internet course Contact Name:
Cost: Free Access Type: www URL: <
Although this course is free, some Globewide Network Academy services are charged for, for example membership.
Record Last Verified Date: January 96 Record Last Modified Date: February 1996
Scales, Walter Record Last Modified Email:
University of Arizona Organization Address:
1515E 1st Street, Tucson, Arizona, USA Audience Level:
EN English Keywords: quiz, Internet Description: Monthly quiz for individuals or teams, with useful archive (ceased April 1995)
, Rick Contact Address: Student and Lecturer hool of Information Resources University of Arizona
St Tucson AZ Contact Phone:  1 602 621 3958
Access Type: www URL: <
January 1996 Record Last Modified Date:
February 1996 Record Last Modified Name:
Scales, Walter Record Last Modified Email:
Trainmat Handle: 78 Category: Resource Guides Country:
Minnesota State University Organization Address:
Minnesota Audience Level: Intermediate Language:
Describes library related resources available via the Internet, such as online catalogs, library gophers, WWW servers, special collections, databases and bibliographies, discussion lists, etc.
Contact Name: Noonan, Dana Contact Address:
Latest Revision Date: January 1995
: Free Access Type: www URL: <
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
Trainmat Handle: 79 Category: Resource Guides Country:
Minnesota State University Organization Address:
EN English Keywords: Telnet, ftp, Electronic Journals, Newsletters.
A comprehensive overview of network resources.
Covers e mail lists, Usenet and library catalogs well, but has comparatively little detail about gopher, WWW etc.
Early sections aimed at VAX users only.
Contact Name: Noonan, Dana Contact Address:
Cost: Free Access Type: www URL: <
Record Last Verified Date: January 96 Record Last Modified Date: February 1996
Wright, Emma F. Record Last Modified Email:
Title: Network Services on Janet and Internet:
A Lunch Time seminar for Library Staff Author Name:
Munroe, George & Kirkpatrick, Diana Author Email: G.Munroe@qub.ac.uk
Belfast Audience Level: Intermediate Language:
EN English Keywords: JANET, Host connection, Email, File transfer, Clients and Servers, Gopher, WAIS, WWW.
Seminar on Janet & the Internet Contact Name: Munroe, George Contact Address:
Queens University Computer Centre Belfast BT7 1NN Northern Ireland Contact Phone:
G.Munroe@Queens Belfast.ac.uk Latest Revision Date:
Cost: Free Access Type: www URL: <
January 1996 Record Last Modified Date:
Last Modified Name: Hiom, Debra Record Last Modified Email:
On Line Collections Country: GB Great Britain Title: SOSIG Documentation and Training Materials
Huxley, Lesly & Ferguson, Nicky Author Email:
lesly.huxley@bristol.ac.uk Organization Name: Centre for Computing in the Social Sciences Organization Address:
University of Bristol, 8 Woodland Road, Bristol BS8 1TN Audience Level:
EN English Keywords: Internet, Social science, Social Science Information Gateway (SOSIG), WWW, Telnet, Lynx, Information services, Netscape, Mailbase, NISS, Mailbase, Library Catalogue, Nameflow, BUBL.
Collection of training and documentation specifically for social scientists.
Contact Name: Huxley, Lesly Contact Address:
Contact Phone:  44 117 928 8472
lesly.huxley@bristol.ac.uk Latest Revision Date: January 1996
: Free Access Type: www URL: <
training.html> Access Type: ftp URL: <
January 1996 Record Last Modified Date:
January 1996 Record Last Modified Name:
Wright, Emma F. Record Last Modified Email:
University of Washington Internet training
University of Washington Organization Address:
Seattle, Washington, USA Audience Level:
Description: A series of presentation graphics about the Internet, including material for trainers on Internet training
Contact Name: Larsson, Laura Contact Address:
1994 Cost: Free Access Type:
Presentation files for PC Windows or Apple Mac require Microsoft PowerPoint or PowerPoint Viewer to run.
January 96 Record Last Modified Date: January 96 Record
Last Modified Name: Kessler, Gary Record Last Modified Email:
Trainmat Handle: 90 Category: User Guides Country:
Global Quest Video Author Name:
NASA K 12 Internet Initiative Organization Address:
Description: Video on benefits to schools on using the internet Contact Name: Sellers, Jennifer Contact Address:
Notes: Record Last Verified Date:
Never Record Last Modified Date: January 96 Record
Dunlop, Angela Record Last Modified Email:
Introducing the Internet: A Trainer's Workshop.
Jaffe, Lee D. Author Email: Organization Name:
: Description: "A good starting point for Internet trainers in developing their presentations... looking for support to use to develop their own materials.
Plus version has the added feature of Powerpoint diskettes for PC Windows and MAC."
1994 Cost: Commercial Access Type: book Publisher Name:
Library Solutions Press Publisher Address: 2137 Oregon St., Berkeley, CA 94705
Publisher Phone:  1 510 841 2636
Internet Workshop Series Number 1 Supplement to Crossing the Internet Threshold.
Information about book available at http://www.internet is.com/library/introduc.html.
Record Last Verified Date: January 96 Record Last Modified Date: April 1996 Record
Prior, Mark Record Last Modified Email:
Title: All About Internet FTP:
Learning and Teaching to Transfer Files on the Internet.
Author Name: Robison, David F. W. Author Email:
A solid work demystifying file transfer protocol (FTP).
A good starting point for Internet trainers in developing their presentations.
Plus version has the added feature of Powerpoint diskettes for PC Windows and MAC."
1994 Cost: Commercial Access Type: book Publisher Name:
Library Solutions Press Publisher Address: 2137 Oregon St., Berkeley, CA 94705
Publisher Phone:  1 510 841 2636
Internet Workshop Series Number 2 Supplement to Crossing the Internet Threshold.
Information about book available from: http://www.internet is.com/library/ftp.html Record Last Verified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
April 1996 Record Last Modified Name
: Prior, Mark Record Last Modified Email:
Trainmat Handle: 93 Category: User Guides
The Computer Chronicles Author Name: Author Email:
Organization Name: Station WITF TV Organization Address:
The reporter (it is produced by a TV station)
interviews Brendan Kehoe, Howard Rheingold, Carl Malamud, and some other individuals.
Short visits are made to NASA, ARPA, and a couple other sites.
A few examples of Internet resources are briefly shown (getting a file with ftp, using MOSAIC, using gopher).
It moves at a brisk pace and makes a nice, quick intro to the Internet."
(Reviewed by Vicki Pengelly, pengelly@selway.umt.edu)
Harrisburg Pa Contact Phone:  1 800 366 9483 or  1 717 236 6000 Contact Email:
video Publisher Name: Station WITF TV
Publisher Phone: Size: 25 minutes
Notes: US$37.50 Record Last Verified Date:
January 1996 Record Last Modified Date: October 94 Record
Last Modified Name: Anagnostelis, Betsy Record Last Modified Email:
Trainmat Handle: 94 Category: User Guides
The Video Guide to the Internet Author Name: Author Email:
Visual Edge Productions Organization Address:
, Altadena, Ca. 91001 Audience Level:
Description: "It uses lively graphic examples, and a sense of humor while giving demonstrations and explanations on all the major Internet tools: e mail, listserv lists, newsgroups, telnet, ftp, archie, gopher, veronica, WAIS and the world wide web with Mosaic."
1 818 797 4638 Contact Email:
video Publisher Name: Visual Edge Productions
2750 Highview Ave., Altadena, Ca.
1 818 797 4638 Size: 45 minutes
$3.50 shipping   $1.65 tax if you live in California Record Last Verified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified Date: January 96 Record
Last Modified Name: Anagnostelis, Betsy Record Last Modified Email:
Trainmat Handle: 95 Category: User Guides
The Video Tape Author Name: Author Email:
Inc. Organization Address: Suite 903, One East Chase Street, Baltimore, MD 212 02 Audience Level:
Description: "This tape serves as an introduction to the Internet and its numerous benefits...
The tape starts off by briefly introducing the history behind this network of networks, and immediately proceeds to the tools most readily available on this network.
Each networking tool is followed by a real demonstration right on your TV screen."
New Technologies Inc. Suite 903
One East Chase Street Baltimore MD 21202 Contact Phone:  1 410 659 0959
video Publisher Name: New Technologies,
Inc. Publisher Address: Suite 903, One East Chase Street, Baltimore,
MD 21202 Publisher Phone:  1 410 659 0959
VHS; system: NTSC; $64.95 (video tape, booklet, support), $5.00 (shipping in the USA, international rates vary), 5% tax for Maryland residents Record Last Verified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified Date: January 96 Record
Last Modified Name: Anagnostelis, Betsy Record Last Modified Email:
Crossing the Internet Threshold, 2nd ed.
Tennant,Roy; Ober,John; Lipow, Anne Author Email: Organization Name:
Internet training; Networking Description: Introduction to basics of networking, oriented to interests of information professionals.
1995 Cost: US$45 Access Type: book Publisher Name:
Library Solutions Press Publisher Address: 1100 Industrial Road Suite 9 San Carlos CA 94070
Intended as an introductory resource for beginners and a guide for trainers.
Further information available from: http://199.182.58.44/crossing.html Record Last Verified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified Date: January 96 Record Last
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
On line Collections Country: US United States Title:
Charm Net's Learning Page: Books, Tutorials, Hint sheets
Charm Net Inc. Organization Address:
EN Keywords: Internet, Internet guides, Internet training, E mail, Usenet, WWW, Unix, IRC, Resource
: A collection of pointers to Internet training documents and guides.
East Lombard Street Baltimore MD 21231
Contact Phone:  1 410 558 3900
Cost: Free Access Type: www URL: <
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
Title: Internet Training and Tutorials Author Name:
Organization Name: Library of Congress Organization Address:
EN Keywords: Internet, Internet training, Internet tutorials,
A collection of links to Internet training documents and course material, including commercial courses.
Free Access Type: www URL: <
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
Internet, Internet training, Internet guides, Resource lists, FTP archives, Gophers sites, USENET Newsgroups, Mailing lists, Internet drafts RFCs and FAQs,
A collection of pointers to resources useful to Internet trainers and end users.
Contact Name: Enns, Neil Contact Address:
Cost: Free Access Type: www URL: <
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
Title: Network Training Materials Gopher (trainmat)
University of Newcastle Organization Address: University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, UK Audience Level:
Internet, Internet training, Internet guides, Resource lists, Internet bibliography, Network Training Pack,
Links to a collection of training and training related resources, including the Network Training Pack, and other material to support Internet training.
Set up as part of the Network Training Materials Project (ended September 1995).
Contact Name: Foster, Jill Contact Address:
Computing Service University of Newcastle Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU UK Contact Phone:  44 191 222 8080
jill.foster@ncl.ac.uk Latest Revision Date: July 1995
Cost: Free Access Type: gopher URL: <
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
EN Keywords: Internet, Internet guides, Beginners, Internet training, Configuration, E mail, Netiquette,
A collection of links to Internet guides for beginners Contact Name:
Access Type: www URL: <
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Organization Address:
EN Keywords: Internet, Internet guides, Internet training, Searching, Resource
: A collection of links to Internet guides, reference materials, browsing and exploring and searching tools, and information about connecting with people Contact Name: December, John Contact Address:
Cost: Free Access Type: www URL: <
December: "I created Internet Web Text for a course in Computer Mediated Communication at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute that I helped teach in the spring of 1994.
My goal was to create an interface students could use to familiarize themselves with the Internet, how to use it, how to find information, and how to connect with people."
January 96 Record Last Modified Date:
January 96 Record Last Modified
Isaacs, Margaret Record Last Modified Email: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
Van Uytven, Herman Author Email
Computing Centre K.U.Leuven Organization Address:
De Croylaan 52a B 3001 Heverlee Leuven Belgium Audience Level:
KULeuvenNet network usage, Internet guides,
Guide describing how to use the Internet.
Available via PostScript and HTTP.
Contains a lot of key links, links are regularly checked using a web robot.
Contains a lot of search tools behind the course Contact Name:
Van Uytven, Herman Contact Address:
Contact Phone:  32 16 322225
Free for non commercial use Access Type:
listserv@cc1.kuleuven.ac.be Email Command: subscribe kulnetgd FirstName LastName Access Type:
472K Access Type: www URL: <
Mailing list only used to advise interested parties of updates.
January 96 Record Last Modified Date: January 96 Record Last Modified Name:
Van Uytven, Herman Record Last Modified Email: Herman.VanUytven@cc.kuleuven.ac.be Template Type:
The Online Netskills Interactive Tutorial
Isaacs, Margaret; Netskills Author Email:
Organization Name: Netskills, University of Newcastle Organization Address:
University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, UK Audience Level:
Description: TONIC is an easy to understand, World Wide Web based structured course, offering  step by step, practical guidance on major Internet topics.
The course as a whole is intended for beginners to networking who have some familiarity with computers.
Contact Name: Foster, Jill Contact Address:
Computing Service University of Newcastle Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU UK Contact Phone:  44 191
222 5000 Contact Email: netskills admin@netskills.ac.uk
Free for non commercial use
This tutorial was originally produced as "Internet for Everyone" as part of the UK Network Training Materials Project.
It has been revised and updated as part of the UK Netskills programme.
April 96 Record Last Modified Date:
April 96 Record Last Modified Name: Foster, Jill Record Last Modified Email: Jill.Foster@newcastle.ac.uk 6.
This document was very much a collaborative effort of the members of the Trainmat WG and was initially based on the catalogue of network training resources put together by Margaret Isaacs in December 1992 as part of an initial study for the UK Mailbase ITTI Network Training Materials Project.
Special thanks are due to the following contributors who took the time to submit or update the templates contained in this document.
Adams, Phil Anagnostelis, Betsy Brack, Verity Ciolek, T. Matthew Dunlop, Angela Foster, Jill Hamilton, Deborah Hiom, Debra Isaacs, Margaret Kessler, Gary Kramer, Stefan Mann, Dawn Norman,
Frank Prior, Mark Salamon, Andras Scales, Walter Sellers, Jennifer Shepstone, Jon Teskey, Patrick Van Uytven, Herman Ward, Carol Wright,
Emma F. Mark Prior made the catalogue available as a WWW document and made provision for updates to be submitted via a web form.
Prior to submission of the final draft version of this catalogue, each template was checked, standarised and updated by Margaret Isaacs.
Emma Wright, Walter Scales and Jon Shepstone, of the Netskills Team, also contacted each Resource's Contact or Author (where possible).
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this document.
Authors' Addresses Jill Foster Mailbase and Netskills University Computing Service University of Newcastle Claremont Road Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU UK Phone:  44 191 222 8250
Jill.Foster@newcastle.ac.uk Margaret Isaacs Network Training Materials Project Department of Computing Science University of Glasgow Glasgow
44 141 330 4913 EMail: mmi@dcs.gla.ac.uk
Mark Prior connect.com.au pty ltd c/o AAP Telecommunications Level 1, 45
5000 AUSTRALIA Phone:  61 8 8203 2088 EMail:
mrp@connect.com.au Appendix A: Catalogue of Network Training Material Template Template Type:
Cost: Additional information for document accessible via E Mail Access Type: [email] Access Email:
Additional information for network accessible document Access Type: [ftp, gopher, WWW, etc.]
Requirements: Additional information for document available off line Access Type: [book, article, video, disk]
Record Last Modified Email: In the additional information sections omit any data elements where no data exists.
Notes on completing the TrainMat template 1.
Selecting a new resource for inclusion When considering a new resource for inclusion in the Trainmat Catalogue, you will need to ask a few questions to decide whether or not it should be included.
Does the item belong in a Training Materials Catalogue?
This catalogue covers network training materials, including self teaching materials, and other resources which facilitate and support training.
A generous interpretation of what constitutes 'training materials' is appropriate.
(See also the note 3.2 on 'Category'.)
Training can be thought of as 'seeking to change behaviour', and if a document does try to do that, then it can be considered for inclusion in this catalogue.
A document that leads the reader through sample exercises may come into this category, but a reference card listing the commands to use does not.
Appropriate  resource lists to include are lists assembled for training purposes and lists frequently used or referred to in training.
As this is an international catalogue it is generally not appropriate to include material for specific services or networks.
That said, some national or regional network training material is of sufficient generality to be considered for inclusion.
It is intended that the catalogue contains a selection of quality training materials, not a comprehensive list of everything available.
Some degree of 'quality control' is needed on the entries.
You will need to decide whether the item is still relevant and reasonably up  to date.
Anything which is two or more years old requires careful scrutiny.
Is there an established mechanism for obtaining it?
This doesn't mean it has to be free.
Submitting a new or revised template
The template for inputting new entries to the catalogue is given in Appendix A.
The prefered method of inputting new or updated information is via an HTML form accessible via the following URL:
http://www.trainmat.ietf.org/form.html You will need to use a Web browser with forms capability.
Input should be quite straightforward.
There are drop down menus to help with input to some fields.
Alternatively, completed templates may be emailed to: catalogue@connect.com.au
This mailing list is a small closed 'review' group for deciding whether or not an item should be included in the catalogue.
Please note that when you enter a new template you will be listed as the person responsible for the entry.
The same procedures may be used by the person responsible for an entry, to update an existing entry.
Notes on completing the various fields of the template
The intention is to keep each entry reasonably short (and preferably not more than one page in length).
Descriptions and other long fields should therefore be kept to a reasonable length.
Note that fields continued on the next line should be indented by at least one white space
Each completed template is auto allocated a "handle" to uniquely identify it.
This field is usually automatically generated and need not be entered when creating a new entry from the template.
Self Paced material On Line Collections
Only user guides that are particularly useful in training should be included.
Appropriate resource lists to include are lists assembled for training purposes and lists frequently used or referred to in training.
Presentation material would include OHP masters, speaker's hand outs and speaker's notes.
Workshop exercises would include workshop hand outs as well as detailed instructions for undertaking hands on exercises.
Self Paced material would include online tutorials.
Online Collections are useful lists of training materials.
The ISO two letter country code followed by the English words should be used.
Australia A full list of these codes is available from: ftp://mcsun.eu.net/documents/iso/ISO 3166
This should be a short title for the item (90 characters or less).
Longer titles may be included in the "Description" field.
The name of the Author of the item should be ordered with the significant portion (for searching/sorting) first.
The email address of the author (if available) in RFC 822 format.
The name of the organization to which the author belongs.
The address of the organization to which the author belongs.
In general, this is the full postal address of the organization.
This is the level of the intended "audience" for the materials.
The language in which the item is written.
This is the ISO 639 two letter code, followed by the english word for the language.
For example: EN English EO
Esperanto A full list of these codes is available from: ftp://mcsun.eu.net/documents/iso/ISO 639 3.11    Keywords A small set of keywords for the item.
3.12    Description A description of the item giving, where possible, its scope and intended audience.
This could be an abstract.
If a short form of the title was entered under "Title:", the long form of the title should be included here.
Fields continued on the next line should be indented by at least one white space.
3.13    Contact Name Name of the person who is the contact person for this item.
(See also note 3.5) 3.14    Contact Address Full postal address of the contact person.
3.15    Contact Phone Telephone number of the contact person.
This should be given in international format (ITU T Recommendation E.123), for example:
44 171 732 8011 3.16    Contact Email
The email address of the contact person (if available) in RFC 822 format.
(See note 3.6) 3.17    Latest Revision Date
The date the item's content was last revised.
This should be in the form: Month year, for example: September 1993 3.18    Cost
This should be one of the following: Free Free for non commercial use Cost Recovery Commercial
3.19    Access Type Access type is one of: email ftp gopher WWW book article video disk other (specify)
One or more of the access type sub sections should be completed giving details of how to access the item.
3.20    Access Email Additional information for a document accessible via Email.
This is the email address of the mail server serving the item.
It must be in RFC 822 format, for example: listserv@bitnic.educom.edu
This is the command sent via email to retrieve the item.
For example: SENDME BITNET INTRO 3.22    URL Additional information for a network accessible document.
A URL (Uniform Resource Locator) is a standard way of describing its location and access method.
This has been defined by the IETF.
The easiest way of describing a URL is by a few examples:
zz3 Note that when a URL spans more than one line, a space should be used as the continuation character.
For ftp access, this is the Login ID required if not anonymous.
The password required for non anonymous ftp access to the item.
The size of the item in kilobytes or pages.
For example: 24k 6pp 3.26    Content Type The type or format of the  item.
The appropriate MIME content type should be used, for example: text/plain text/richtext application/msword application/postscript application/zip
A full list of these types is available from: ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in notes/iana/assignments/media types
3.27    Requirements Short description of the additional requirements for using/viewing this item.
For example, a CBL learning package might run only on a PC with a specific configuration.
3.28    Publisher Name Additional information for a document available off line.
The name of the publisher.
(See also note 3.5) 3.29    Publisher Address
The full postal address of the publisher.
The telephone number of the publisher.
(See also note 3.15) 3.31    Publisher Email
The email address of the publisher (if available) in RFC 822 format.
(See note 3.6) 3.32    Size Size of the publication in pages.
The bibilographic reference of the publication, i.e. the ISBN for books or ISSN for serials.
This is additional information related to the entry and the verification information.
3.35    Record Last Verified Date
The date the item's contents were last verified.
See note 3.16 on the date format.
3.36    Record Last Modified Date
The date this catalogue entry was last changed or modified.
(See note 3.17 on the date format.)
This item is added automatically when using the form on the World Wide Web.
3.37    Record Last Modified Name Name of the person last modifying the entry.
(See also note 3.5) 3.38    Record Last Modified Email
The email address of the person last modifying the entry (if available) in RFC 822 format.
(See note 3.6) 3.39    Additional information sections In the additional information sections above, omit any data elements where no data exists.
Appendix C: A Summary of Related Mailing Lists Mailinglist Name:
Auto subscriptions to: LISTSERV@UBVM.CC.BUFFALO.EDU "subscribe NETTRAIN firstname lastname" Human Admin to: MILLESJG@SLUVCA.SLU.EDU
Discussion list for librarians, computer support personnel, and all those who are involved in teaching others how to use Bitnet and Internet.
Topics for discussion include such areas as: how to divide responsibility for teaching internetwork use; methods of teaching and resources used; and policies on access (faculty, student, staff) to the networks.
NETTRAIN will also serve as a clearinghouse for Bitnet and Internet training materials developed in a variety of contexts and for a variety of needs.
NETTRAIN is, therefore, intended for experienced users of Bitnet and Internet,  not  for beginners looking for help with basic questions.
Archive: Normal "LISTSERV" monthly archive available via email.
ISUS Network Training Task Force Address:
Auto subscriptions to: mailbase@mailbase.ac.uk "subscribe network training tf firstname lastname" Human Admin to: network training tf request@mailbase.ac.uk Description: Working list for the TERENA(RARE) ISUS task force on Network Training.
Archives: http://www.mailbase.ac.uk/lists k o/network training tf/ archive.html Normal Mailbase monthly archives available via email Mailinglist Name: USWG: IETF User Services WG mailing list
uswg@isi.edu Administration: uswg request@isi.edu Description:
General discussion list for the IETF User Services Working Group.
The Network Training Materials Working Group reports to this group.
Unknown Mailinglist Name: WG ISUS:
Auto subscriptions to: mailserver@rare.nl "subscribe wg isus firstname lastname" Human Admin to:
General discussion list for the whole TERENA(RARE) ISUS (Information Services and User Support) Working Group.
The Network Training task Force reports to this group.
isus/archives ftp://rare.nl/11/lists/wg isus/archives http://www.terena.nl/terena/working groups/wg
isus/hypermail Normal Mailserver monthly archives available via email
