Abstract When the Public Key Infrastructure using X.509 (PKIX)
Working Group was chartered, an object identifier arc was allocated by IANA for use by that working group.
This document describes the object identifiers that were assigned in that arc, returns control of that arc to IANA, and establishes IANA allocation policies for any future assignments within that arc.
When the Public Key Infrastructure using X.509 (PKIX)
Working Group was chartered, an object identifier arc was allocated by IANA for use by that working group.
These object identifiers are primarily used with Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1)
The ASN.1 specifications continue to evolve, but object identifiers can be used with any and all versions of ASN.1.
The PKIX object identifier arc is: id
} This document describes the object identifiers that were assigned in the PKIX arc, returns control of the PKIX arc to IANA, and establishes IANA allocation policies for any future assignments within the PKIX arc.
Subordinate Object Identifier Arcs Twenty five subordinate object identifier arcs were used, numbered from 0 to 23 and 48.
In addition, there are seven subordinate arcs.
They were assigned as follows:
Extended key purpose identifiers id kp
d pkix 5 1 }
d pkix 5 2 }
CMC GLA Requests and Responses i
{ id pkix 7 99 }
SCVP name validation policy errors
d pkix 19 2 }
SCVP basic validation policy errors
d pkix 19 3 }
SCVP distinguished name validation policy errors
d pkix 19 4 }
d pkix 48 1 }
The values assigned in each of these subordinate object identifier arcs are discussed in the next section.
IANA Considerations IANA has updated one registry table and created 33 additional tables.
Updates to the new tables are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
The expert is expected to ensure that any new values are strongly related to the work that was done by the PKIX Working Group.
That is, additional object identifiers are to be related to X.509 certificates, X.509 attribute certificates, X.509 certificate revocation lists (CRLs), or protocols associated with them.
Object identifiers for other purposes should not be assigned in this arc.
to "SMI Security for Mechanism Codes" Registry
The reference for the Public Key Infrastructure using X.509 (PKIX) entry (decimal value 7) has been updated to point to this document.
"SMI Security for PKIX" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, a "PKIX (1.3.6.1.5.5.7)" table with three columns has been added:
[RFC7299] Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX Module Identifier" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX Module Identifier (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.0)" table with three columns has been added:
id mod kea profile 88
id mod proxy cert extns
id mod ip addr and as ident
id mod attribute cert 02
id mod pkix1 implicit 02
id mod sip domain extns2007
id mod ocsp agility 2009 93
id mod ocsp agility 2009 88
id mod send cert extns
id mod ip addr and as ident 2
id mod wlan extns 2
id mod dhSign 2012 88
[BGPSEC] Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX Extended Key Purpose" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX
Extended Key Purpose Identifiers (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3)
[BGPSEC] Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
d regCtrl authenticatorUTF8    Reserved and Obsolete Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX CRMF Registration Information" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, add an "SMI Security for PKIX CRMF Registration Information (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.5.2)" table with three columns:
] Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
id alg dhPop sha1 is also known as id alg dh pop.
id alg dh sig hmac sha1 is also known as id alg dhPop static sha1 hmac sha1 and
id dhPop static hmac sha1.
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX CMC Controls" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX CMC Controls (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.7)
id cmc statusInfo is also known as id
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX CMC GLA Requests and Responses
" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX CMC GLA Requests and Responses (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.7.99)
[RFC5275] Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
Other Name Forms" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry,
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX Personal Data Attributes" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX Personal Data Attributes (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.9)
] Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX OIDs Used Only for Testing" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX OIDs used Only for
] Note: The object identifiers in this table should not appear on the public Internet.
These object identifiers are ONLY for TESTING.
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
[RFC5275] Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
[RFC5940] Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
id stc build pkc path
id stc build valid pkc path
id stc build aa path
id stc build valid aa path
id stc build status checked aa path
id stc status check ac and build status checked aa path [RFC5055]
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX SCVP Want
Back Types" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry,
an "SMI Security for PKIX SCVP Want Back Types (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.18)
id swb pkc best cert path
id swb pkc revocation info
d swb aa cert path
d swb aa revocation info
id swb ac revocation info
id swb ac cert status
id swb pkc all cert paths
id swb pkc ee revocation info
id swb pkc CAs revocation info
id swb partial cert path
id swb ers best cert path
id swb ers partial cert path
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX SCVP Validation Policies and Algorithms" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX SCVP Validation Policies and Algorithms (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.19)
id svp nameValAlg is also known as id nvae.
Note: id svp basicValAlg is also known as id bvae.
Note: id svp dnValAlg is also known as id dnvae and id nva dnCompAlg.
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
id nvae bad name type
[RFC5055] Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX SCVP Basic Validation Policy Errors" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX SCVP Basic Validation Policy Errors (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.19.3)
Reserved and Obsolete Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX SCVP Distinguished Name Validation Policy Errors" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX SCVP Distinguished Name Validation Policy Errors (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.19.4)
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
Other Logotype Identifiers" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry,
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX Proxy Certificate Policy Languages" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX Proxy Certificate Policy Languages (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.21)" table with three columns has been added:
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
id mr pkix alphanum ids
Reserved and Obsolete Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX Subject Key Identifier Semantics" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX Subject Key Identifier Semantics (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.23)
Reserved and Obsolete Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
signedObjectRepository    Reserved and Obsolete 10
id ad ocsp is also known as id pkix ocsp.
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
"SMI Security for PKIX Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP)
" Registry Within the SMI numbers registry, an "SMI Security for PKIX Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP)
id pkix ocsp service locator
d pkix ocsp pref sig algs
d pkix ocsp extended revoke
Future updates to this table are to be made according to the Specification Required policy as defined in [RFC5226].
This document populates an IANA registry, and it raises no new security considerations.
The protocols that specify these values include the security considerations associated with their usage.
The id pe nsa certificate extension should not appear in any certificate that is used on the public Internet.
