NETWORK HOST STATUS This RFC reports on the status of most Network Hosts from June 5 to June 16.
During this period the MIT Math Lab PDP 10 (Network address 198) became a server.
No testing was done on June 6 due to an attempt to install the new IMP system.
No testing was done on June 9 as the prototype Terminal IMP was being used for software debugging.
On June 16 the ARPA Terminal IMP (Network 156) was installed in Arlington, Virginia.
Several Hosts are currently excluded from the daily testing.
These Hosts fall into two categories: 1) Hosts which are not expected to be functioning on the Network as servers (available for use from other sites) on a regular basis for at least two weeks.
The only Host in this category is the PDP 10 at Case (Network address 13).
2) Hosts which are currently intended to be users only.
Included here are the Terminal IMPs, which are presently in the Network (AMES, MITRE, NBS, ETAC, USC, GWC, NOAA, RADC, SAAC, BELVOIR, ARPA, and BBN ).
This category also includes the Network Control Center computer (Network address 5) which is used solely for gathering statistics from the Network.
Finally, included among these Hosts are the following:
The tables on the next two pages summarize the Host status for this period.
The BBN Terminal IMP (Network Address 158) is a prototype and as such is frequently not connected to the Network, but being used to refine and debug the Terminal IMP programs.
Bob Braden (Telnet in June)
The NMC is a research site and would like to have prior arrangement with each user.
(Destination Host either dead or inaccessible [due to network partitioning or local IMP failure] from the BBN Terminal IMP.)
(Destination Host opened a connection, informed user that all Network ports were in use, and immediately closed the connection.)
H   1/2 Open (Destination Host opened a connection but then either immediately closed it, or did not respond any further.)
(Destination Host opened a connection and was accessible to users.)
(Destination Host returned a CLS to the initial RFC.)
(Destination Host did not complete the ICP and open a connection within 60 seconds.)
The only service currently offered by the UCLA IBM 360/91 is a Network Job Service (NETRJS), however, the BBN Terminal IMP is not equipped to test NETRJS.
We are assuming that initial connection to the NETRJS logger indicates that NETRJS is also functioning.
#These sites advertise that they may not have their system available at these times.
[ direction of Alex McKenzie.
