Abstract RFC 5988 standardized a means of indicating the relationships between resources on the Web.
This specification defines a pair of reciprocal link relation types that may be used to express the relationship between a collection and its members.
Introduction RFC 5988 standardized a means of indicating the relationships between resources on the Web.
This specification defines a pair of reciprocal link relation types that may be used to express the relationship between a collection and its members.
These link relation types can be applied to a wide range of use cases across multiple media types.
For example, the 'collection' and 'item' link relation types are used in these media types:
OpenSearch 1.1: see Section 4.5.4.1 of [OpenSearch] 2.
Maze XML: see [Maze] 3.
Collection JSON: see [CollectionJSON] 2.
The following link relations are defined.
'item' When included in a resource that represents a collection, the 'item' link relation identifies a target resource that represents a member of that collection.
For example, if a resource represents a catalog of products, that same representation may include one or more links to resources that represent members of that catalog.
" rel "item">View Product X001</a>
>; rel "item"; title "View Product X002" 2.2.
'collection' When included in a resource that represents a member of a collection, the 'collection' link relation identifies a target resource that represents a collection of which the context resource is a member.
>; rel "collection"; title "Return to
Product Group X" Since it is possible that a resource could be a member of multiple collections, multiple 'collection' link relations may appear within the same representation: <
> The target resource representation need not be restricted to representing a list.
>; rel "collection"; title "Shakespeare's Collected Works A History" It should also be noted that the same link might represent an 'item' in one collection as well as a 'collection' itself.
In this case, both link relation values can be applied to the same link:
>; rel "collection item"; title "A Review of Issac Asimov's Collected Works Vol.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the 'collection' and 'item' link relations below as per [RFC5988].
'item' Link Relation Registration Relation Name:
The target IRI points to a resource that is a member of the collection represented by the context IRI.
'collection' Link Relation Registration Relation Name:
The target IRI points to a resource that represents the collection resource for the context IRI.
The two link relation types defined in this document do not introduce any new security issues to those which are discussed in Section 7 of RFC5988 [RFC5988].
The 'item' and 'collection' link relation types do not have any internationalization considerations other than those which are discussed in Section 8 of RFC5988 [RFC5988].
