This document specifies a mapping between two protocols.
This specification should be used when this mapping is performed on the Internet or in the UK Academic Community.
This specification may be modified in the light of implementation experience, but no substantial changes are expected.
Some mail networks which use RFC 822 cannot support the full character set required by all aspects of RFC 822.
This document describes a symmetrical mapping between full RFC 822 addressing, and a form for use on these networks.
Any addresses within the networks will not use the full RFC 822 addressing, and so any addresses encoded according to this standard will always represent remote addresses.
This document derives from a mapping originally specified in RFC 987 [Kille86a], where the domain of application was more restricted.
Two terms are now defined:
This implies full support for transfer to and from any legal RFC 822 address.
This implies a subset of RFC 822 addressing.
The quoted string form of local part need not be supported.
Standard UUCP mail transfer falls into this category.
Restricted RFC 822 is undesirable, but in practice it exists in many places.
When a message is transferred from full RFC 822 to restricted RFC 822, and address forms used in full RFC 822 are involved, message loss may occur (e.g., it may not be possible to return an error message).
This RFC describes a quoting mechanism which may be used to map between full RFC 822 and restricted RFC 822, in order to alleviate this problem.
The RFC 822 EBNF meta notation is used.
Any EBNF definitions taken from RFC 822 are prefixed by the string "822.".
The following EBNF is specified.
The choice of special abbreviations (as opposed to decimal encoding) provided is based on the manner in which this mapping is most frequently used.
Space is given a single character encoding, due to its (expected) frequency of use, and backslash as the RFC 822 single quote character.
This mapping is used to transform between the two forms of 822.word:
822.quoted string (restricted RFC 822) and 822.atom (restricted RFC 822).
(full RFC 822   restricted RFC 822), first remove any quoting from any 822.quoted string.
Then, all EBNF.a char are used directly and all other CHAR are encoded as EBNF.a encoded char.
(restricted RFC 822   full RFC 822): if the address can be parsed as EBNF.encoded atom reverse the previous mapping.
If it cannot be so parsed, map the characters directly.
This mapping should be used for all addresses, at the MTS or Header level.
It is applied to the 822.local part of the addresses.
argle#h##126#@blargle Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
