Abstract This document defines a RADIUS (Remote Authentication Dial In User Service) attribute that carries an IPv6 prefix that is to be delegated to the user.
This attribute is usable within either RADIUS or Diameter.
This document defines the Delegated IPv6 Prefix attribute as a RADIUS [1] attribute that carries an IPv6 prefix to be delegated to the user, for use in the user's network.
For example, the prefix in a Delegated IPv6 Prefix attribute can be delegated to another node through DHCP Prefix Delegation [2].
The Delegated IPv6 Prefix attribute can be used in DHCP Prefix Delegation between the delegating router and a RADIUS server, as illustrated in the following message sequence.
The Framed IPv6 Prefix attribute [4] is not designed to support delegation of IPv6 prefixes to be used in the user's network, and therefore Framed IPv6 Prefix and Delegated IPv6 Prefix attributes may be included in the same RADIUS packet.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3].
The length of the entire attribute, in bytes.
At least 4 (to hold Type/Length/Reserved/Prefix Length for a 0 bit prefix), and no larger than 20 (to hold Type/Length/ Reserved/Prefix  Length for a 128 bit prefix)
Reserved Always set to zero by sender; ignored by receiver Prefix Length
The length of the prefix being delegated, in bits.
At least 0 and no larger than 128 bits (
identifying a single IPv6 address)
Note that the prefix field is only required to be long enough to hold the prefix bits and can be shorter than 16 bytes.
Any bits in the prefix field that are not part of the prefix MUST be zero.
The Delegated IPv6 Prefix MAY appear in an Access Accept packet, and can appear multiple times.
It MAY appear in an Access Request packet as a hint by the NAS to the server that it would prefer these prefix(es), but the server is not required to honor the hint.
The Delegated IPv6 Prefix attribute MAY appear in an Accounting  Request packet.
The Delegated IPv6 Prefix MUST NOT appear in any other RADIUS packets.
The following table provides a guide to which attributes may be found in which kinds of packets, and in what quantity.
Request Accept Reject Challenge Accounting
The meaning of the above table entries is as follows:
This attribute MUST NOT be present. 0
Zero or more instances of this attribute MAY be present.
1 Zero or one instance of this attribute MAY be present.
Exactly one instance of this attribute MUST be present.
One or more of these attributes MUST be present.
Diameter Considerations When used in Diameter, the attribute defined in this specification can be used as a Diameter AVP from the Code space 1 255, i.e., RADIUS attribute compatibility space.
No additional Diameter Code values are therefore allocated.
The data types of the attributes are as follows:
The attribute in this specification has no special translation requirements for Diameter to RADIUS or RADIUS to Diameter gateways, i.e., the attribute is copied as is, except for changes relating to headers, alignment, and padding.
See also RFC 3588 [5], Section 4.1, and RFC 4005 [6], Section 9.
The text in this specification describing the applicability of the Delegated IPv6 Prefix attribute for RADIUS Access Request applies in Diameter to AA Request [6] or Diameter EAP Request [7].
The text in this specification describing the applicability of the Delegated IPv6 Prefix attribute for RADIUS Access Accept applies in Diameter to AA Answer or Diameter EAP Answer that indicates success.
The text in this specification describing the applicability of the Delegated IPv6 Prefix attribute for RADIUS Accounting Request applies to Diameter Accounting Request [6] as well.
IANA Considerations IANA assigned a Type value, 123, for this attribute from the RADIUS Attribute Types registry.
Security Considerations Known security vulnerabilities of the RADIUS protocol are discussed in RFC 2607 [8], RFC 2865 [1], and RFC 2869 [9].
Use of IPsec [10] for providing security when RADIUS is carried in IPv6 is discussed in RFC 3162.
Security considerations for the Diameter protocol are discussed in RFC 3588 [5].
