Abstract This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in TCP/IP based internets.
In particular, it defines objects for managing DS1 Interfaces   including both T1 and E1 (a.k.a., CEPT 2 Mbit/s) links.
This document entirely replaces RFC 1232, which contains a fundamental error: many objects are encoded as Counters that must be encoded as INTEGERs or Gauges.
The magnitude of the change required is sufficient that virtually every object changed.
Therefore, the MIB documented in RFC 1232 should not be implemented.
The Internet standard Network Management Framework consists of three components.
They are: STD 16/RFC 1155 [1] which defines the SMI, the mechanisms used for describing and naming objects for the purpose of management.
STD 16/RFC 1212 [2] defines a more concise description mechanism, which is wholly consistent with the SMI.
RFC 1156 [3] which defines MIB I, the core set of managed objects for the Internet suite of protocols.
STD 17/RFC 1213 [4] defines MIB II, an evolution of MIB
I based on implementation experience and new operational requirements.
STD 15/RFC 1157 [5] which defines the SNMP, the protocol used for network access to managed objects.
The Framework permits new objects to be defined for the purpose of experimentation and evaluation.
Objects Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed the Management Information Base or MIB.
Objects in the MIB are defined using the subset of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1)
[6] defined in the SMI.
In particular, each object has a name, a syntax, and an encoding.
The name is an object identifier, an administratively assigned name, which specifies an object type.
The object type together with an object instance serves to uniquely identify a specific instantiation of the object.
For human convenience, we often use a textual string, termed the OBJECT DESCRIPTOR, to also refer to the object type.
The syntax of an object type defines the abstract data structure corresponding to that object type.
The ASN.1 language is used for this purpose.
However, the SMI [1] purposely restricts the ASN.1 constructs which may be used.
These restrictions are explicitly made for simplicity.
The encoding of an object type is simply how that object type is represented using the object type's syntax.
Implicitly tied to the notion of an object type's syntax and encoding
is how the object type is represented when being transmitted on the network.
The SMI specifies the use of the basic encoding rules of ASN.1 [7], subject to the additional requirements imposed by the SNMP.
Format of Definitions Section 4 contains contains the specification of all object types contained in this MIB module.
The object types are defined using the conventions defined in the SMI, as amended by the extensions specified in STD 16, RFC 1212 [2].
The changes from RFC 1232 are the following: (1)  This MIB module contains three groups: DS1 Near End Group which is mandatory, DS1 Far End Group which is optional, and the Fractional Table, which is optional.
(2)  The Far End Group is a new group and contains statistics that are collected from the far end DS1 interface.
The Far End Group may only be implemented by DS1 systems that use the facilities data link to exchange this information both T1.403 and PUB 54016 define ways to exchange this information over data links; vendors may use other proprietary means to do this on various link types.
(3)  ds1CSUIndex has been renamed dsx1LineIndex.
This object is the identifier of a DS1 Interface on a device.
On a CSU, a single DS1 data stream will cross two DS1 interfaces, which have separate dsx1LineIndex values.
(4)  ds1Index has been renamed dsx1IfIndex.
This value for this object is equal to the value of ifIndex from the Interfaces table of MIB II (STD 17, RFC 1213).
(5)  an object has been added (dsx1TransmitClockSource) to indicate the source of transmit clock.
The ACCESS for objects in the dsx1ConfigTable has been set to read write for items that are configurable.
(7)  Description of test configurations has changed.
A new object has been added called dsx1LoopbackConfig, which better describes the loopback capabilities of a DS1 interface on a device.
The description of line alarm status has changed.
A new object has been added called dsx1LineStatus.
This object better describes the status (e.g., failure state and loopback state) of a DS1 interface.
All Counters have been changed to Gauges.
(10) Information about how applications might use the zero code suppression have been removed; only the actual line coding algorithm is described.
For clarity the object was thus renamed to dsx1LineCoding.
A Line Errored Seconds object has been added to all near end tables and the count of Bipolar Violations (BPVs) was changed to a count of Line Code Violations (LCVs).
Bursty Errored Seconds (a.k.a., Errored Seconds Type B) and Degraded Minutes objects have been added to all near end tables.
The Coding Violation error event is now referred to as a Path Coding Violation (PCV) Error Event.
These objects are used when the particular media being used to realize an interface is a DS1 physical interface.
At present, this applies to these values of the ifType variable in the Internet  standard MIB: ds1 (18)
The definitions contained herein are based on the AT&T T 1 Superframe (a.k.a., D4) and Extended Superframe (ESF) formats [8, 9], the latter of which conforms to ANSI specifications [10], and the CCITT Recommendations [11, 12], referred to as E1 for the rest of this memo.
The various T1 and E1 line disciplines are similar enough that separate MIBs are unwarranted, although there are some differences.
For example, Loss of Frame is defined more rigorously in the ESF specification than in the D4 specification, but it is defined in both.
Where it is necessary to distinguish between the flavors of E1 with and without CRC, E1 CRC to denotes the "with CRC" form (G.704 Table 4b) and E1 noCRC denotes the "without CRC" form (G.704 Table 4a).
Binding between ifIndex and DS1 Interfaces
Different physical configurations for the support of SNMP with DS1 equipment exist.
To accommodate these scenarios, two different indices for DS1 interfaces are introduced in this MIB.
These indices are dsx1IfIndex and dsx1LineIndex.
External interface scenario: the SNMP Agent represents all managed DS1 lines as external interfaces (for example, an Agent residing on the device supporting DS1 interfaces directly): For this scenario, all interfaces are assigned an integer value equal to ifIndex, and the following applies:
ifIndex dsx1IfIndex dsx1LineIndex for all interfaces.
The dsx1IfIndex column of the DS1 Configuration table relates each DS1 interface to its corresponding interface (ifIndex) in the Internet standard MIB (MIB II STD 17, RFC 1213).
External & Internal interface scenario: the SNMP Agents resides on an host external from the device supporting DS1 interfaces (e.g., a router).
The Agent represents both the host and the DS1 device.
The index dsx1LineIndex is used to not only represent the DS1 interfaces external from the host/DS1 device combination, but also the DS1 interfaces connecting the host and the DS1 device.
The index dsx1IfIndex is always equal to ifIndex.
A shelf full of CSUs connected to a Router.
An SNMP Agent residing on the router proxies for itself and the CSU.
The router has also an Ethernet interface:
For this example, ifNumber is equal to 5.
Note the following description of dsx1LineIndex:
the dsx1LineIndex identifies a DS1 Interface on a managed device.
If there is an ifEntry that is directly associated with this and only this DS1 interface, it should have the same value as ifIndex.
Otherwise, number the dsx1LineIndices with an unique identifier following the rules of choosing a number greater than ifNumber and numbering inside interfaces (e.g., equipment side) with even numbers and outside interfaces (e.g., network side) with odd numbers.
Objectives of this MIB Module
There are numerous things that could be included in a MIB for DS1 signals:
the management of multiplexors, CSUs, DSUs, and the like.
The intent of this document is to facilitate the common management of all devices with DS1 interfaces.
As such, a design decision was made up front to very closely align the MIB with the set of objects that can generally be read from DS1 devices that are currently deployed.
The terminology used in this document to describe error conditions on a DS1 interface as monitored by a DS1 device are based on the definitions from the ANSI T1M1.3/92 005R1 draft standard [13].
If the definition in this document does not match the definition in the ANSI T1M1.3/92 005R1 draft document, the implementer should follow the definition described in this document.
Error Events Bipolar Violation (BPV)
Error Event A BPV error event for an AMI coded signal is the occurrence of a pulse of the same polarity as the previous pulse.
A BPV error event for a B8ZS  or HDB3  coded signal is the occurrence of a pulse of the same polarity as the previous pulse without being a part of the zero substitution code.
Excessive Zeroes (EXZ) Error Event An Excessive Zeroes error event for an AMI coded signal is the occurrence of more than fifteen contiguous zeroes.
For a B8ZS coded signal, the defect occurs when more than seven contiguous zeroes are detected.
Line Coding Violation (LCV) Error Event A Line Coding Violation (LCV) is the occurrence of either a Bipolar Violation (BPV) or Excessive Zeroes (EXZ) Error Event.
Path Coding Violation (PCV) Error Event A Path Coding Violation error event is a frame synchronization bit error in the D4 and E1 noCRC
formats, or a CRC error in the ESF and E1 CRC formats.
A Controlled Slip is the replication or deletion of the payload bits of a DS1 frame.
A Controlled Slip  may be performed when there is a difference between the timing of a synchronous receiving terminal and the received signal.
A Controlled Slip does not cause an Out of Frame defect.
Performance Defects Out Of Frame
An OOF defect is the occurrence of a particular density of Framing Error events.
For T1 links, an Out of Frame defect is declared when the receiver detects two or more framing errors within a 3 msec period for ESF signals and 0.75 msec for D4 signals, or two or more errors out of five or fewer consecutive framing bits.
For E1 links, an Out Of Frame defect is declared when three consecutive frame alignment signals have been received with an error (see G.706 Section 4.1 [17]).
Once an Out Of Frame Defect is declared, the framer starts searching for a correct framing pattern.
The Out of Frame defect ends when the signal is in frame.
In frame occurs when there are fewer than two frame bit errors within 3 msec period for ESF signals and 0.75 msec for D4 signals.
For E1 links, in frame occurs when a) in frame
N the frame alignment signal is correct and b) in frame N 1
the frame alignment signal is absent (i.e., bit 2 in TS0 is a one) and c) in frame
the frame alignment signal is present and correct.
Alarm Indication Signal (AIS) Defect For D4 and ESF links
, the 'all ones' condition is detected at a DS1 line interface upon observing an unframed signal with a one's density of at least 99.9% present for a time equal to or greater than T, where 3 ms <  T <
The AIS is terminated upon observing a signal not meeting the one's density or the unframed signal criteria for a period equal to or greater than than T.
For E1 links, the 'all ones' condition is detected at the line interface as a string of 512 bits containing fewer than three zero bits (see O.162 [14] Section 3.3.2).
Performance Parameters All performance parameters are accumulated in fifteen minute intervals and up to 96 intervals (24 hours worth) are kept by an agent.
Fewer than 96 intervals of data will be available if the agent has been restarted within the last 24 hours.
In addition, there is a rolling 24 hour total of each performance parameter.
There is no requirement for an agent to ensure fixed relationship between the start of a fifteen minute interval and any wall clock; however some agents may align the fifteen minute intervals with quarter hours.
A Line Errored Second, according to T1M1.3, is a second in which one or more Line Code Violation error events were detected.
While many implementations are currently unable to detect the zero strings, it is expected that interface manufacturers will add this capability in deference to ANSI; therefore, it will become available in time.
In the T1M1.3 specification, near end Line Code Violations and far end Line Errored Seconds are counted.
For consistency, we count Line Errored Seconds at both ends.
A Controlled Slip Second is a one second interval containing one or more controlled slips.
For ESF and E1 CRC links an Errored Second
is a second with one or more Path Code Violations
OR one or more Out of Frame defects OR one or more
Controlled Slip events OR a detected AIS defect.
For D4 and E1 noCRC
links, the presence of Bipolar Violations also triggers an Errored Second.
This is not incremented during an Unavailable Second.
A Bursty Errored Second (also known as Errored Second type B) is a second with fewer than 320 and more than 1 Path Coding Violation error events, no Severely Errored Frame defects and no detected incoming AIS defects.
Controlled slips are not included in this parameter.
This is not incremented during an Unavailable Second.
A Severely Errored Second for ESF signals is a second with 320 or more Path Code Violation Error Events OR one or more Out of Frame defects OR a detected AIS defect.
For E1 CRC signals, a Severely Errored Second is a second with 832 or more Path Code Violation error events OR one or more Out of Frame defects.
signals, a Severely Errored Second is a 2048 LCVs or more.
For D4 signals, a Severely Errored Second is a count of one second intervals with Framing Error events, or an OOF defect, or 1544 LCVs or more.
Controlled slips are not included in this parameter.
This is not incremented during an Unavailable Second.
Severely Errored Framing Second (SEFS)
An Severely Errored Framing Second is a second with one or more Out of Frame defects OR a detected AIS defect.
Degraded Minutes A Degraded Minute is one in which the estimated error rate exceeds 1E 6 but does not exceed 1E 3
Degraded Minutes are determined by collecting all of the Available Seconds, removing any Severely Errored Seconds grouping the result in 60 second long groups and counting a 60 second long group (a.k.a., minute) as degraded if the cumulative errors during the seconds present in the group exceed 1E 6.
Available seconds are merely those seconds which are not Unavailable as described below.
Unavailable Seconds (UAS) are calculated by counting the number of seconds that the interface is unavailable.
The DS1 interface is said to be unavailable from the onset of 10 contiguous SESs, or the onset of the condition leading to a failure (see Failure States).
If the condition leading to the failure was immediately preceded by one or more contiguous SESs, then the DS1 interface unavailability starts from the onset of these SESs.
Once unavailable, and if no failure is present, the DS1 interface becomes available at the onset of 10 contiguous seconds with no SESs.
Once unavailable, and if a failure is present, the DS1 interface becomes available at the onset of 10 contiguous seconds with no SESs, if the failure clearing time is less than or equal to 10 seconds.
If the failure clearing time is more than 10 seconds, the DS1 interface becomes available at the onset of 10 contiguous seconds with no SESs, or the onset period leading to the successful clearing condition, whichever occurs later.
With respect to the DS1 error counts, all counters are incremented while the DS1 interface is deemed available.
While the interface is deemed unavailable, the only count that is incremented is UASs.
A special case exists when the 10 or more second period crosses the 900 second statistics window boundary, as the foregoing description implies that the Severely Errored Second and Unavailable Second counters must be adjusted when the Unavailable Signal State is entered.
Clearly, successive GETs of the affected dsx1IntervalSESs and dsx1IntervalUASs objects will return differing values if the first GET occurs during the first few seconds of the window.
This is viewed as an unavoidable side effect of selecting the presently defined managed objects as a basis for this memo.
The following failure states are received, or detected failures, that are reported in the dsx1LineStatus object.
When a DS1 interface would, if ever, produce the conditions leading to the failure state is described in the appropriate specification.
The Far End Alarm failure is also known as "Yellow Alarm" in the T1 case and "Distant Alarm" in the E1 case.
For D4 links, the Far End Alarm failure is declared when bit 6 of all channels has been zero for at least 335 ms and is cleared when bit 6 of at least one channel is non zero for a period
T, where T is usually less than one second and always less than 5 seconds.
The Far End Alarm failure is not declared for D4 links when a Loss of Signal is detected.
For ESF links, the Far End Alarm failure is declared if the Yellow Alarm signal pattern occurs in at least seven out of ten contiguous 16 bit pattern intervals and is cleared if the Yellow Alarm signal pattern does not occur in ten contiguous 16 bit signal pattern intervals.
For E1 links, the Far End Alarm failure is declared when bit 3 of time slot zero is received set to one on two consecutive occasions.
The Far End Alarm failure is cleared when bit 3 of time slot zero is received set to zero.
Alarm Indication Signal (AIS) Failure
The Alarm Indication Signal failure is declared when an AIS defect is detected at the input and the  AIS defect still exists after the Loss Of Frame failure (which is caused by the unframed nature of the 'all ones' signal) is declared.
The AIS failure is cleared when the Loss Of Frame failure is cleared.
Loss Of Frame Failure For T1 links, the Loss Of Frame failure is declared when an OOF or LOS  defect has persisted for T seconds, where 2 <  T <  10.
The Loss Of Frame failure is cleared when there have been no OOF or LOS defects during a period T
where 0 <  T <  20.
Many systems will perform "hit integration" within the period T before declaring or clearing the failure e.g., see TR 62411 [16].
For E1 links, the Loss Of Frame Failure is declared when an OOF defect is detected.
For E1 links, the Loss Of Signal failure is declared when greater than 10 consecutive zeroes are detected (see O.162 Section 3.4.4).
The Loopback Pseudo Failure is declared when the near end equipment has placed a loopback (of any kind) on the DS1.
This allows a management entity to determine from one object whether the DS1 can be considered to be in service or not (from the point of view of the near end equipment).
TS16 Alarm Indication Signal Failure For E1 links, the TS16 Alarm Indication Signal failure is declared when time slot 16 is received as all ones for all frames of two consecutive multiframes (see G.732 Section 4.2.6).
This condition is never declared for T1.
The Loss Of MultiFrame failure is declared when two consecutive multiframe alignment signals (bits 4 through 7 of TS16 of frame 0) have been received with an error.
The Loss Of Multiframe failure is cleared when the first correct multiframe alignment signal is received.
The Loss Of Multiframe failure can only be declared for E1 links operating with G.732 [18] framing (sometimes called "Channel Associated Signalling" mode).
Far End Loss Of Multiframe Failure
The Far End Loss Of Multiframe failure is declared when bit 2 of TS16 of frame 0 is received set to one on two consecutive occasions.
The Far End Loss Of Multiframe failure is cleared when bit 2 of TS16 of frame 0 is received set to zero.
The Far End Loss Of Multiframe failure can only be declared for E1 links operating in "Channel Associated Signalling" mode.
This is a character string specified by the circuit vendor, and is useful when communicating with the vendor during the troubleshooting process.
SMI transmission, DisplayString FROM RFC1213
MIB OBJECT TYPE FROM RFC 1212;
This MIB module uses the extended OBJECT TYPE macro as    defined in RFC 1212.
the MIB module for the DS1 objects ds1 OBJECT IDENTIFIER
The DS1 Near End Group   Implementation of this group is mandatory for all systems   that attach to a DS1 Interface.
"An entry in the DS1 Configuration table.
dsx1IfIndex INTEGER, dsx1TimeElapsed INTEGER, dsx1ValidIntervals INTEGER, dsx1LineType INTEGER, dsx1LineCoding INTEGER, dsx1SendCode INTEGER, dsx1CircuitIdentifier DisplayString, dsx1LoopbackConfig INTEGER, dsx1LineStatus INTEGER, dsx1SignalMode INTEGER, dsx1TransmitClockSource INTEGER, dsx1Fdl INTEGER } dsx1LineIndex
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"This object is the identifier of a DS1
Inter  face on a managed device.
If there is an ifEn  try that is directly associated with
interface,  it should have the same value as ifIndex.
Otherwise,  the  value exceeds  ifNumber,  and  is a unique identifier following this rule: inside  interfaces  (e.g., equipment  side)  with even numbers and outside interfaces  (e.g.,  network   side)   with   odd numbers."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"This value for this object  is  equal  to  the value  of  ifIndex from the Interfaces table of MIB II (RFC 1213)."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
..96) ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of  previous  intervals  for  which valid data was collected.
The value will be 96 unless the interface was brought on line within the last 24 hours, in which case the value will be the number of complete 15  minute  intervals the since interface has been online."
INTEGER { other(1), dsx1ESF(2), dsx1D4(3), dsx1E1(4), dsx1E1 CRC(5), dsx1E1 MF(6), dsx1E1 CRC MF(7) }
"This variable indicates  the  variety  of  DS1 Line  implementing  this  circuit.
The type of circuit affects the number of bits  per  second that  the circuit can reasonably carry, as well as the interpretation of the  usage  and  error statistics.
The values, in sequence, describe:
dsx1E1 CRC    CCITT Recommendation G.704 (Table 4b)
{ dsx1ConfigEntry 5 } dsx1LineCoding OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
INTEGER { dsx1JBZS (1), dsx1B8ZS (2), dsx1HDB3 (3), dsx1ZBTSI (4), dsx1AMI (5), other(6) }
"This variable describes the  variety  of  Zero Code  Suppression  used  on  the link, which in turn affects a number of its characteristics.
dsx1JBZS refers the Jammed  Bit  Zero  Suppres  sion,  in  which  the  AT&T specification of at least one pulse
every 8 bit periods is literal
ly  implemented  by forcing a pulse in bit 8 of each channel.
Thus, only seven bits per  chan  nel, or 1.344 Mbps, is available for data.
dsx1B8ZS refers to the use of a specified  pat  tern  of  normal  bits  and  bipolar violations which are used to replace a sequence  of  eight zero bits.
ANSI Clear Channels may use dsx1ZBTSI, or  Zero Byte Time Slot Interchange.
E1 links, with or without CRC, use dsx1HDB3  or dsx1AMI.
dsx1AMI refers to a mode wherein no  zero  code suppression
is  present  and the line encoding does not solve the problem directly.
In  this application, the higher layer must provide data which meets or exceeds the  pulse  density  re  quirements, such as inverting HDLC data."
INTEGER { dsx1SendNoCode(1), dsx1SendLineCode(2), dsx1SendPayloadCode(3), dsx1SendResetCode(4), dsx1SendQRS(5), dsx1Send511Pattern(6), dsx1Send3in24Pattern(7), dsx1SendOtherTestPattern(8) } ACCESS  read write
"This variable indicates what type of  code  is being sent across the DS1 interface by the dev  ice.
dsx1SendNoCode sending looped or normal data
dsx1SendLineCode sending a request for a line loopback
dsx1SendPayloadCode sending a request for a payload loopback
dsx1SendResetCode sending a loopback termination request dsx1SendQRS sending a Quasi Random Signal
(QRS)  test pattern dsx1Send511Pattern sending a 511 bit fixed test pattern dsx1Send3in24Pattern sending a fixed test pattern of 3 bits set in 24 dsx1SendOtherTestPattern sending a test pattern
the   transmission vendor's circuit identifier, for the purpose of facilitating troubleshooting."
INTEGER { dsx1NoLoop(1), dsx1PayloadLoop(2), dsx1LineLoop(3), dsx1OtherLoop(4)
"This variable represents the  loopback  confi  guration of the DS1 interface.
/write access should return badValue in response to a requested loopback state that the interface does not support.
Not in the loopback state.
A device  that is not capable of performing a loopback on the interface shall always return this  as it's value.
dsx1PayloadLoop The received signal at this  interface  is looped  through  the device.
Typically the received signal is  looped  back  for
after  it has passed through the device's framing function.
The received signal at this interface does not  go  through the device (minimum pene  tration) but is looped back out.
dsx1OtherLoop Loopbacks that are not defined here."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"This variable indicates the Line Status of the interface.
re  ceived 'alarm'  and transmitted 'alarm'  infor  mation.
The dsx1LineStatus is a bit  map  represented  as  a  sum, therefore, it can represent multiple failures (alarms) and a LoopbackState simultaneously.
dsx1NoAlarm should be set if and only if no other flag  is set.
If the dsx1LoopbackState bit is set, the loopback  in  ef  fect can be determined from the dsx1LoopbackConfig object.
Near end sending LOF Indication 8
Near end is looped 256
Near End detects a test code 4096
INTEGER { none (1), robbedBit (2), bitOriented (3), messageOriented (4) }
"'none' indicates that no bits are reserved for signaling on this channel. '
robbedBit' indicates that T1 Robbed Bit  Sig  naling is in use. '
bitOriented' indicates that E1 Channel  Asso  ciated
Signaling is in use. '
messageOriented' indicates that Common  Chan  nel Signaling is in use either on channel 16 of an E1 link or channel 24 of a T1."
INTEGER { loopTiming (1), localTiming (2), throughTiming (3) } ACCESS  read write
"The source of Tranmit Clock. '
loopTiming' indicates that the recovered  re  ceive clock is used as the transmit clock. '
localTiming' indicates  that  a  local  clock source is used. '
ceive  clock  from another interface is used as the transmit clock."
"This bitmap describes the use of  the  facili  ties data link, and is the sum of the capabili  ties: 'other' indicates that a protocol  other  than one following is used. '
dsx1Ansi T1 403' refers to the  FDL  exchange recommended by ANSI. '
dsx1Att 54016' refers to ESF FDL exchanges. '
dsx1Fdl none' indicates that the device  does not use the FDL."
The DS1 current table contains various statistics being   collected for the current 15 minute interval.
"An entry in the DS1 Current table."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies  the DS1  interface
to which this entry is applica  ble.
The interface identified by a  particular value  of  this  index is the same interface as identified by the same value as a dsx1LineIndex object instance."
"The number of Errored Seconds, encountered  by a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute inter  val."
{ dsx1CurrentEntry 2 } dsx1CurrentSESs OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX  Gauge ACCESS
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Severely Errored Seconds encoun  tered  by
a  DS1  interface  in the current 15 minute interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Severely Errored Framing Seconds encountered  by  a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
"The number of Controlled Slip Seconds  encoun  tered  by
a  DS1  interface  in the current 15 minute interval."
"The number of Path Coding  Violations  encoun  tered  by
a  DS1  interface  in the current 15 minute interval."
"The number of Bursty  Errored  Seconds  (BESs) encountered  by  a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The number of Degraded Minutes  (DMs)
a  DS1  interface  in the current 15 minute interval."
"The number of Line Code Violations (LCVs)  en  countered  by a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The DS1 Interval Table contains various statistics   collected by each DS1 Interface over the previous 24 hours of   operation.
The past 24 hours are broken into 96 completed   15 minute intervals.
mandatory DESCRIPTION "The DS1 Interval table."
{ ds1 8 } dsx1IntervalEntry OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
"An entry in the DS1 Interval table."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies  the DS1  interface
to which this entry is applica  ble.
The interface identified by a  particular value  of  this  index is the same interface as identified by the same value as a dsx1LineIndex object instance."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"A number between 1 and 96, where 1 is the most recently completed 15 minute interval and 96 is the least recently completed 15 minutes  inter
(assuming   that  all  96  intervals  are valid)."
"The number of Errored Seconds encountered by a DS1  interface in one of the previous 96, indi  vidual 15 minute, intervals."
} dsx1IntervalSESs OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Severely Errored Seconds encoun  tered by a DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
"The number of Severely Errored Framing Seconds encountered  by  a  DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
{ dsx1IntervalEntry 5 } dsx1IntervalUASs OBJECT TYPE
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Unavailable Seconds  encountered by  a  DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
"The number of Controlled Slip Seconds  encoun  tered by a DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Line Errored Seconds encountered by  a  DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
"The number of Bursty  Errored  Seconds  (BESs) encountered  by  a  DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
The number of Degraded Minutes  (DMs)
encoun  tered by a DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
"The number of Line Code Violations (LCVs)  en  countered  by a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The DS1 Total Table contains the cumulative sum of the   various statistics for the 24 hour period preceding the   current interval.
"An entry in the DS1 Total table."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies  the DS1  interface
to which this entry is applica  ble.
The interface identified by a  particular value  of  this  index is the same interface as identified by the same value as a dsx1LineIndex object instance."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Severely Errored Seconds encoun  tered  by  a  DS1  interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Severely Errored Framing Seconds encountered  by a DS1 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Controlled Slip Seconds  encoun  tered  by
a  DS1  interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
"The number of Path Coding  Violations  encoun  tered  by
a  DS1  interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
"The number of Line Errored Seconds encountered by  a DS1 interface in the previous 24 hour in  terval."
"The number of Bursty  Errored  Seconds  (BESs) encountered  by a DS1 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
The number of Degraded Minutes  (DMs)
a  DS1  interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
"The number of Line Code Violations (LCVs)  en  countered  by a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
The DS1 Far End Group   Implementation of this group is optional for all systems   that attach to a DS1 Interface.
The DS1 Far End Current Table
The DS1 Far End Current table contains various statistics   being collected for the current 15 minute interval.
The statistics are collected from the far end messages on the   Facilities Data Link.
The definitions are the same as   described for the near end information.
"The DS1 Far End Current table."
"An entry in the DS1 Far End Current table."
:  SEQUENCE { dsx1FarEndCurrentIndex INTEGER, dsx1FarEndTimeElapsed INTEGER, dsx1FarEndValidIntervals INTEGER, dsx1FarEndCurrentESs Gauge, dsx1FarEndCurrentSESs Gauge, dsx1FarEndCurrentSEFSs Gauge, dsx1FarEndCurrentUASs Gauge, dsx1FarEndCurrentCSSs Gauge, dsx1FarEndCurrentLESs Gauge, dsx1FarEndCurrentPCVs Gauge, dsx1FarEndCurrentBESs Gauge, dsx1FarEndCurrentDMs Gauge } dsx1FarEndCurrentIndex
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies  the DS1  interface
to which this entry is applica  ble.
The interface identified by a  particular value  of  this  index is the same interface as identified by the same value  an  dsx1LineIndex object instance."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
..96) ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of previous far end  intervals for  which  valid data was collected.
The value will be 96 unless the interface  was brought  online  within the last 24 hours, in which case the value will be the number of  complete  15  minute far end intervals since the interface has been online."
"The number of Far Far End Errored Seconds  en  countered  by a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
"The number of Far End Severely Errored Seconds encountered  by  a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Severely Errored Framing Seconds  encountered  by a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
"The number of Far End Controlled Slip  Seconds encountered  by  a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
"The number of Far End Line Errored Seconds en  countered  by a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Path  Coding  Violations reported  via the far end block error count en  countered by a DS1 interface in the current  15 minute interval."
"The number of Bursty  Errored  Seconds  (BESs) encountered  by  a DS1 interface in the current 15 minute interval."
SYNTAX Gauge ACCESS read only STATUS mandatory DESCRIPTION
The number of Degraded Minutes  (DMs)
a  DS1  interface  in the current 15 minute interval."
The DS1 Far End Interval Table
The DS1 Far End Interval Table contains various statistics   collected by each DS1 interface over the previous 24 hours of   operation.
The past 24 hours are broken into 96   completed 15 minute intervals.
"The DS1 Far End Interval table."
"An entry in the DS1 Far End Interval table."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies  the DS1  interface
to which this entry is applica  ble.
The interface identified by a  particular value  of  this  index is the same interface as identified by the same value as a dsx1LineIndex object instance."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"A number between 1 and 96, where 1 is the most recently completed 15 minute interval and 96 is the least recently completed 15 minutes  inter
(assuming   that  all  96  intervals  are valid)."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Errored Seconds  encoun  tered by a DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Severely Errored Seconds encountered  by  a  DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
4 } dsx1FarEndIntervalSEFSs OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Severely Errored Framing Seconds  encountered  by a DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15  minute,  in  tervals."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Unavailable Seconds  encountered by  a  DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Controlled Slip  Seconds encountered  by  a  DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
7 } dsx1FarEndIntervalLESs OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Line Errored Seconds en  countered by a DS1 interface in one of the pre  vious 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Path  Coding  Violations reported  via the far end block error count en  countered by a DS1 interface in one of the pre  vious 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
"The number of Bursty  Errored  Seconds  (BESs) encountered  by  a  DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
The number of Degraded Minutes  (DMs)
encoun  tered by a DS1 interface in one of the previous 96, individual 15 minute, intervals."
The DS1 Far End Total Table
The DS1 Far End Total Table contains the cumulative sum of the   various statistics for the 24 hour period preceding the   current interval.
"The DS1 Far End Total table."
"An entry in the DS1 Far End Total table."
SEQUENCE { dsx1FarEndTotalIndex INTEGER, dsx1FarEndTotalESs Gauge, dsx1FarEndTotalSESs Gauge, dsx1FarEndTotalSEFSs Gauge, dsx1FarEndTotalUASs Gauge, dsx1FarEndTotalCSSs Gauge, dsx1FarEndTotalLESs Gauge, dsx1FarEndTotalPCVs Gauge, dsx1FarEndTotalBESs Gauge, dsx1FarEndTotalDMs Gauge } dsx1FarEndTotalIndex
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies  the DS1  interface
to which this entry is applica  ble.
The interface identified by a  particular value  of  this  index is the same interface as identified by the same value  an  dsx1LineIndex object instance."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Errored Seconds  encoun  tered  by  a  DS1  interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Severely Errored Seconds encountered  by a DS1 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Severely Errored Framing Seconds  encountered  by a DS1 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Controlled Slip  Seconds encountered  by a DS1 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Far End Path  Coding  Violations reported  via the far end block error count en  countered by a DS1 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
TYPE SYNTAX Gauge ACCESS read only STATUS mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The number of Bursty  Errored  Seconds  (BESs) encountered  by a DS1 interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
The number of Degraded Minutes  (DMs)
a  DS1  interface in the previous 24 hour interval."
Systems which   are indifferent to data content, such as CSUs, need not   implement it.
The DS1 fractional table identifies which DS1 channels   associated with a CSU are being used to support a   logical interface, i.e., an entry in the interfaces table   from the Internet standard MIB.
For example, consider an application managing a North   American ISDN Primary Rate link whose division is a 384 kbit/s   H1 "B" Channel for Video, a second H1 for data to a primary   routing peer, and 12 64 kbit/s H0 "B" Channels.
Consider that   some subset of the H0 channels are used for voice and the   remainder
are available for dynamic data calls.
we count a total of 14 interfaces multiplexed onto the DS1   interface.
Six DS1 channels (for the sake of the example,   channels 1..6) are used for Video, six more (7..11 and 13)   are used for data, and the remaining 12 are are in channels   12 and 14..24.
Let us further imagine that ifIndex 2 is of type DS1 and   refers to the DS1 interface, and that the interfaces layered   onto it are numbered 3..16.
We might describe the allocation of channels, in the   dsx1FracTable, as follows:
"An entry in the DS1 Fractional table."
SEQUENCE { dsx1FracIndex INTEGER, dsx1FracNumber INTEGER, dsx1FracIfIndex INTEGER } dsx1FracIndex OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The index value which uniquely identifies  the DS1  interface
to which this entry is applica  ble.
The interface identified by a  particular value  of  this  index is the same interface as identified by the same value  an  dsx1LineIndex object instance."
ACCESS  read only STATUS  mandatory DESCRIPTION
"The channel number for this entry."
mandatory DESCRIPTION "An index value that uniquely identifies an in  terface.
The interface identified by a partic  ular value of this index is the same  interface as  identified by the same value
an ifIndex ob  ject instance.
If no interface is currently us  ing  a channel, the value should be zero.
If a single interface occupies more  than  one  time slot,  that ifIndex value will be found in mul  tiple time slots."
