Abstract This document specifies a MIME media type used to carry a single attribute certificate as defined in RFC 5755.
[RFC2585] defines the MIME media types for public key certificates and certificate revocation lists (CRLs).
This document specifies a MIME media type for use with attribute certificates as defined in RFC 5755
Attribute certificates are ASN.1 encoded [X.680].
[RFC5755] tells which portions of the attribute certificate must use the distinguished encoding rules (DER) [X.690] and which portions are permitted to use the basic encoding rules (BER) [X.690].
Since DER is a proper subset of BER, BER decoding all parts of a properly constructed attribute certificate will be successful.
This document registers with IANA the "application/pkix attr cert" Internet Media Type for use with an attribute certificate as defined in [RFC5755].
This registration follows the procedures defined in BCP 13
application Subtype name: pkix attr cert Required parameters:
None Encoding considerations: binary Security considerations
: An attribute certificate provides authorization information.
An attribute certificate is most often used in conjunction with a public key certificate [RFC5280], and the two certificates should use the same encoding of the distinguished name as described in the Security Considerations of this document.
Interoperability considerations: The media type will be used with HTTP to fetch attribute certificates.
Other uses may emerge in the future.
Published specification: RFC 5755 Applications that use this media type:
The media type is used with a MIME compliant transport to transfer an attribute certificate.
Attribute certificates convey authorization information, and they are most often used in conjunction with public key certificates as defined in [RFC5280].
None File extension(s): .ac Macintosh File Type Code(s)
: none Person & email address to contact for further information:
none Author: Russ Housley <housley@vigilsec.com
Security Considerations Attribute certificate issuers must encode the holder entity name in exactly the same way as the public key certificate distinguished name.
If they are encoded differently, implementations may fail to recognize that the attribute certificate and public key certificate belong to the same entity.
