IAB OFFICIAL PROTOCOL STANDARDS Status of this Memo
This memo describes the state of standardization of protocols used in the Internet as determined by the Internet Activities Board (IAB).
An overview of the standards procedures is presented first, followed by discussions of the standardization process and the RFC document series, then the explanation of the terms is presented, the lists of protocols in each stage of standardization follows, and finally pointers to references and contacts for further information.
This memo is issued quarterly, please be sure the copy you are reading is dated within the last three months.
Current copies may be obtained from the Network Information Center or from the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (see the contact information at the end of this memo).
Do not use this memo after 31 July 89.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
The Internet Activities Board maintains a list of documents that define standards for the Internet protocol suite.
It provides these standards with the goal of co ordinating the evolution of the Internet protocols; this co ordination has become quite important as the Internet protocols are increasingly in general commercial use.
Protocol standards may be proposed by anyone in the Internet community, by writing and submitting an RFC.
In general, any proposed protocol will be reviewed or developed in the context of some Task Force of the IAB, or some working group within that Task Force.
The IAB will assign a proposed protocol to a working group if official delegation is necessary.
The recommendation of the working group or task force is given major consideration in the decision by the IAB to assign a state and status to the protocol.
The general policy is not to designate a protocol as an official standard until there is implementation experience with it.
In cases where there is uncertainty as to the proper decision concerning a protocol, the IAB may convene a special review committee consisting of interested parties from the working group and members of the IAB itself, with the purpose of recommending some explicit action to the IAB.
It is possible to proceed with widespread implementation of a standard without the approval of the IAB.
For example, some vendor standards have become very important to the Internet community even though they have not been proposed or reviewed by the IAB.
However, the IAB strongly recommends that the IAB standards process be used in the evolution of the protocol suite to maximize interoperability (and to prevent incompatible protocol requirements from arising).
The IAB reserves the use of the term "standard" in any RFC to only those protocols which the IAB has approved.
Anyone can invent a protocol, document it, implement it, test it, and so on.
The IAB believes that it is very useful to document a protocol at an early stage to promote suggestions from others interested in the functionality the of protocol and from those interested in protocol design.
Once a protocol is implemented and tested it is useful to report the results.
The RFC document series is the preferred place for publishing these protocol documents and testing results.
The IAB encourages the documenting of every protocol developed in the Internet (that is, the publication of the protocol specification as an RFC), even if it is never intended that the protocol become an Internet standard.
A protocol that is not intended to become a standard is called "experimental".
Protocols that are intended to become standards are first designated as "proposed" protocols.
It is expected that while in this state the protocol will be implemented and tested by several groups.
It is likely that an improved version of the protocol will result from this activity.
Once a proposed protocol has become stable and has a sponsor (an individual willing to speak for the protocol to the IAB) it may advance to the "draft standard" state.
In this state, it should be reviewed by the entire Internet community.
This draft standard state is essentially a warning to the community that unless an objection is raised or a flaw is found this protocol will become a "standard".
Once a protocol has been a draft standard for a sufficient time (usually 6 months) without serious objections the IAB may act to declare the protocol an official Internet standard.
Some protocols have been superseded by better protocols or are otherwise unused.
Such protocols are designated "historic".
In addition to a state (like proposed or standard)
a protocol is also assigned a status.
A protocol can be required, meaning that all systems in the Internet must implement it.
For example, the Internet Protocol (IP) is required.
A protocol may be recommended, meaning that systems should implement this protocol.
A protocol may be elective, meaning that systems may implement this protocol; that is, if (and only if) the functionality of this protocol is needed or useful for a system it must use this protocol to provide the functionality.
A protocol may be termed not recommended if it is not intended to be generally implemented; for example, experimental or historic protocols.
Few protocols are required to be implemented in all systems.
This is because there is such a variety of possible systems; for example, gateways, terminal servers, workstations, multi user hosts.
It is not necessary for a gateway to implement TCP and the protocols that use TCP (though it may be useful).
It is expected that general purpose hosts will implement at least IP (including ICMP), TCP and UDP, Telnet, FTP, SMTP, Mail, and the Domain Name System (DNS).
The Request for Comments Documents
The documents called Request for Comments (or RFCs) are the working notes of the Internet research and development community.
A document in this series may be on essentially any topic related to computer communication, and may be anything from a meeting report to the specification of a standard.
All standards are published as RFCs, but not all RFCs specify standards.
Anyone can submit a document for publication as an RFC.
Submissions must be made via electronic mail to the RFC Editor (see the contact information at the end of this memo).
While RFCs are not refereed publications, they do receive technical review form the task forces, individual technical experts, or the RFC Editor, as appropriate.
Once a document is assigned an RFC number and published, that RFC is never revised or re issued with the same number.
There is never a question of having the most recent version of a particular RFC.
However, a protocol (such as File Transfer Protocol (FTP)) may be improved and re documented many times in several different RFCs.
It is important to verify that you have the most recent RFC on a particular protocol.
This "IAB Official Protocol Standards" memo is the reference for determining the correct RFC to refer to for the current specification of each protocol.
The RFCs are available from the Network Information Center at SRI International.
For more information about obtaining RFCs see the contact information at the end of this memo.
There are four other reference documents of interest in checking the current status of protocol specifications and standardization.
These are the Assigned Numbers, the Official Protocols, the Gateway Requirements, and the Host Requirements.
Note that these documents are revised and updated at different times; in case of differences between these documents, the most recent must prevail.
Also one should be aware of the MIL STD publications on IP, TCP, Telnet, FTP, and SMTP.
These are described in section 4.5.
This document lists the assigned values of the parameters used in the various protocols.
For example, IP protocol codes, TCP port numbers, Telnet Option Codes, ARP hardware types, and Terminal Type names.
Assigned Numbers was most recently issued as RFC 1010.
Another document, Internet Numbers, lists the assigned IP network numbers, and the autonomous system numbers.
Internet Numbers was most recently issued as RFC 1062.
This document list the protocols and describes any known problems and ongoing experiments.
Official Protocols was recently issued as RFC  1011.
This document reviews the specifications that apply to gateways and supplies guidance and clarification for any ambiguities.
Gateway Requirement was recently issued as RFC 1009.
This document reviews the specifications that apply to hosts and supplies guidance and clarification for any ambiguities.
Host Requirements is in preparation and will be issued soon.
The Internet community specifications for IP (RFC 791) and TCP (RFC  793) and the DoD MIL STD specifications are intended to describe exactly the same protocols.
Any difference in the protocols specified by these sets of documents should be reported to DCA and to the IAB.
The RFCs and the MIL STDs for IP and TCP differ in style and level of detail.
It is strongly advised that the two sets of documents be used together.
The IAB and the DoD MIL STD specifications for the FTP, SMTP, and Telnet protocols are essentially the same documents (RFCs 765, 821, 854).The MIL STD versions have been edited slightly.
Note that the current Internet specification for FTP is RFC 959.
There are two independent categorizations of protocols.
The first is the state of standardization which is one of "standard", "draft standard", "proposed", "experimental", or "historic".
The second is the status of this protocol which is one of "required", "recommended", "elective", or "not recommended".
One could expect a particular protocol to move along the scale of status from elective to required at the same time as it moves along the scale of standardization from proposed to standard.
At any given time a protocol is a cell of the following matrix.
Protocols are likely to be in cells in about the following proportions (indicated by the number of Xs).
Most will be on the main diagonal.
A new protocol is most likely to start in the (proposed, elective) cell, or the (experimental, not recommended) cell.
Some protocol are particular to hosts and some to gateways; a few protocols are used in both.
The definitions of the terms below will refer to a "system" which is either a host or a gateway (or both).
It should be clear from the context of the particular protocol which types of systems are intended.
The IAB has established this as an official standard protocol for the Internet.
These are separated into two groups: (1) IP protocol and above, protocols that apply to the whole Internet; and (2) network specific protocols, generally specifications of how to do IP on particular types of networks.
The IAB is actively considering this protocol as a possible Standard Protocol.
Substantial and widespread testing and comment is desired.
Comments and test results should be submitted to the IAB.
There is a possibility that changes will be made in a Draft Standard Protocol before it becomes a Standard Protocol.
These are protocol proposals that may be considered by the IAB for standardization in the future.
Implementation and testing by several groups is desirable.
Revisions of the protocol specification are likely.
A system should not implement an experimental protocol unless it is participating in the experiment and has coordinated its use of the protocol with the developer of the protocol.
Typically, experimental protocols are those that are developed as part of a specific ongoing research project not related to an operational service offering.
While they may be proposed as a service protocol at a later stage, and thus become proposed, draft, and then standard protocols, the designation of a protocol as experimental is meant to suggest that the protocol, although perhaps mature, is not intended for operational use.
These are protocols that are unlikely to ever become standards in the Internet either because they have been superseded by later developments or due to lack of interest.
These are protocols that are at an evolutionary dead end.
All systems must implement the required protocols.
All systems should implement the recommended protocols.
Elective Protocol A system may or may not implement an elective protocol.
The general notion is that if you are going to do something like this, you must do exactly this.
These protocols are not recommended for general use.
This may be because of their limited functionality, specialized nature, or experimental or historic state.
IP NETBIOS Transmission of IP over NETBIOS
It is expected that a system will support one or more physical networks and for each physical network supported the appropriate protocols from the above list must be supported.
That is, it is elective to support any particular type of physical network, and for the physical networks actually supported it is required that they be supported exactly according to the protocols in the above list.
The Internet Activities Board has designated two different network management protocols with the same status of "Draft Standard" and "Recommended".
The two protocols are the Common Management Information Services and Protocol over TCP/IP (CMOT)
[RFC 1095] and the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
The IAB intends each of these two protocols to receive the attention of implementers and experimenters.
The IAB seeks reports of experience with these two protocols from system builders and users.
By this action, the IAB recommends that all IP and TCP implementations be network manageable (e.g., implement the Internet MIB [RFC 1066], and that implementations that are network manageable are expected to adopt and implement at least one of these two Internet Draft Standards.
SUN RPC    Remote Procedure Call Protocol
IP Distance Vector Multicast Routing
Not Recommended ISI memo 6.6.
Not Recommended IEN  90 GRAPHICS   Graphics Protocol
Not Recommended  NIC 24308 7.
Internet Activities Board Contact Contact: Jon Postel Deputy Internet Architect USC Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA  90292 6695 1
Please send your comments about this list of protocols and especially about the Draft Standard Protocols to the Internet Activities Board care of the Deputy Internet Architect.
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority Contact Contact:
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority USC Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way Marina del Rey, CA
90292 6695 1 213 822 1511 JKRey@ISI.EDU
The protocol standards are managed for the IAB by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority.
Please refer to the documents "Assigned Numbers" (RFC 1010) and "Official Internet Protocols" (RFC 1011) for further information about the status of protocol documents.
There are two documents that summarize the requirements for host and gateways in the Internet, "Host Requirements" (RFC in preparation) and "Gateway Requirements" (RFC 1009).
How to obtain the most recent edition of this "IAB Official Protocol Standards" memo: The file "in notes/iab standards.txt" may be copied via FTP from the VENERA.ISI.EDU computer using the FTP username "anonymous" and FTP password "guest".
Request for Comments Editor Contact Contact: Jon Postel RFC Editor USC Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA  90292 6695 1
213 822 1511 Postel@ISI.EDU Documents may be submitted via electronic mail to the RFC Editor for consideration for publication as RFC.
If you are not familiar with the format or style requirements please request the "Instructions for RFC Authors".
In general, the style of any recent RFC may be used as a guide.
The Network Information Center and Requests for Comments Contact Contact: SRI International DDN Network Information Center 333
Ravenswood Avenue Menlo Park, CA  94025 1 800 235 3155 1 415 859 3695 NIC@SRI
The Network Information Center (NIC) provides many information services for the Internet community.
Among them is maintaining the Requests for Comments (RFC) library.
RFCs can be obtained via FTP from SRI NIC.ARPA with the pathname RFC:RFCnnnn.
TXT where "nnnn" refers to the number of the RFC.
A list of all RFCs may be obtained by copying the file RFC:
Log in with FTP username ANONYMOUS and password GUEST.
The NIC also provides an automatic mail service for those sites which cannot use FTP.
Address the request to SERVICE@SRI
and in the subject field of the message indicate the RFC number, as in "Subject: RFC nnnn".
How to obtain the most recent edition of this "IAB Official Protocol Standards" memo:
IAB STANDARDS.TXT may be copied via FTP from the SRI NIC.ARPA computer following the same procedures used to obtain RFCs.
Jon Postel USC/Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
(213) 822 1511 Email: Postel@ISI.EDU
