Abstract This document defines fifteen metadata elements for resource description in a cross disciplinary information environment.
The Dublin Core Metadata Workshop Series began in 1995 with an invitational workshop that brought together librarians, digital library researchers, content experts, and text markup experts to promote better discovery standards for electronic resources.
The resulting metadata element set defines fifteen metadata elements for resource description in a cross disciplinary information environment.
This document contains the current text of Dublin Core "Version 1.1".
Version 1.1 is the basis of ANSI/
The text in the present RFC closely follows the text in the 2007 revision of ANSI/NISO Z39.85, especially Sections 2 6 and 10 12 [Z39.85 2007].
The present RFC obsoletes RFC 2413
[RFC2413], which was the first published version of the Dublin Core ("Version 1.0").
The main differences between the present RFC and RFC 2413 are in the wording of definitions   for Contributor and Date (semantically broadened), for Relation (clarified), and in the general removing of redundant references to "the content of" a resource.
In addition, the present RFC recommends lowercase element names (consistent with RDF property types), remains silent about the unrestrictedness of element ordering and repeatability
(application profiles being the proper place to discuss such topics), and references the current abstract model, vocabularies, and namespace policies in which the Dublin Core is embedded.
The Dublin Core Metadata Element Set is a vocabulary of fifteen properties for use in resource description.
The name "Dublin" is due to its origin at a 1995 invitational workshop in Dublin, Ohio; "core" because its elements are broad and generic, usable for describing a wide range of resources.
The fifteen element "Dublin Core" described in this document is part of a larger set of metadata vocabularies and technical specifications maintained by the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI).
The full set of vocabularies, DCMI Metadata Terms [DCTERMS], also includes a set of resource classes, the DCMI Type Vocabulary [DCTYPE].
The terms in DCMI vocabularies are intended to be used in combination with terms from other compatible vocabularies in the context of application profiles and on the basis of the DCMI Abstract Model [DCAM].
All changes made to terms of the Dublin Core Metadata Element Set since 2001 have been reviewed by a DCMI Usage Board in the context of a DCMI Namespace Policy [DCNMSPC].
The namespace policy describes how DCMI terms are assigned Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) and sets limits on the range of editorial changes that may allowably be made to the labels, definitions, and usage comments associated with existing DCMI terms.
The Dublin Core Metadata Element Set is a standard for cross domain resource description.
[RFC3986], "Uniform Resource Identifier (URI):
Generic Syntax", this specification does not limit the scope of what might be a resource.
The elements described in this document are typically used in the context of an application profile which constrains or specifies their use in accordance with local or community based requirements and policies.
The specification of such implementation detail is outside the scope of this document.
the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, maintenance agency for Dublin Core Metadata Element Set.
Resource   anything that might be identified (the same definition as in RFC 3986 and in the DCMI Abstract Model).
Lifecycle of a resource   a sequence of events that mark the development and use of a resource.
Some examples of events in a lifecycle are: conception of an invention, creation of a draft, revision of an article, publication of a book
, acquisition by a library, transcription to magnetic disk, migration to optical storage, translation into English, and derivation of a new work (e.g., a movie).
In the element descriptions below, each element has a descriptive label ("label") for human consumption and a unique token ("name") for use in machine processing.
In accordance with the DCMI Namespace Policy [DCNMSPC], the "name" of an element is appended to a DCMI namespace URI to construct a Uniform Resource Identifier as a globally unique identifier for that element.
The use of element names and URIs in the context of different implementation technologies is explained in DCMI Encoding Guidelines [DCENCOD].
A name given to the resource.
An entity primarily responsible for making the resource.
Examples of a Creator include a person, an organization, or a service.
Typically, the name of a Creator should be used to indicate the entity.
The topic of the resource.
Typically, the subject will be represented using keywords, key phrases, or classification codes.
Recommended best practice is to use a controlled vocabulary.
To describe the spatial or temporal topic of the resource, use the Coverage element.
An account of the resource.
Examples of a Publisher include a person, an organization, or a service.
Typically, the name of a Publisher should be used to indicate the entity.
An entity responsible for making contributions to the resource.
Examples of a Contributor include a person, an organization, or a service.
Typically, the name of a Contributor should be used to indicate the entity.
A point or period of time associated with an event in the lifecycle of the resource.
Recommended best practice is to use an encoding scheme, such as the W3CDTF profile of ISO 8601 [W3CDTF].
The nature or genre of the resource.
To describe the file format, physical medium, or dimensions of the resource, use the Format element.
The file format, physical medium, or dimensions of the resource.
Examples of dimensions include size and duration.
Recommended best practice is to use a controlled vocabulary such as the list of Internet Media Types [MIME].
An unambiguous reference to the resource within a given context.
Recommended best practice is to identify the related resource by means of a string conforming to a formal identification system.
A language of the resource.
Temporal topic may be a named period, date, or date range.
A jurisdiction may be a named administrative entity or a geographic place to which the resource applies.
Recommended best practice is to use a controlled vocabulary such as the Thesaurus of Geographic Names [TGN].
Where appropriate, named places or time periods can be used in preference to numeric identifiers such as sets of coordinates or date ranges.
Information about rights held in and over the resource.
The Dublin Core element set poses no risk to computers and networks.
It poses minimal risk to searchers who obtain incorrect or private information due to careless mapping from rich data descriptions to the Dublin Core elements.
No other security concerns are likely.
(This appendix is not part of the Z39.85 standard.
It is included for information only.)
Further information about the Dublin Core metadata element set is available at the URL, http://dublincore.org/
This Web site contains information about workshops, reports, working group papers, projects, and new developments concerning the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI).
Appendix B:  Maintenance Agency (This appendix is not part of the Z39.85 standard.
It is included for information only.)
The Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI) is responsible for the development, standardization, and promotion of the Dublin Core metadata element set.
Information on DCMI is available at the URL, http://dublincore.org/
