big paper clips vs small ones; heirarchical assembly 3) big vs small for large documents vs. small ones?
the presence of electronic staples or paper clips may break some programs, particularly those designed to do high speed copying!
2) to reduce transmission charges, electronic staples should be bought in boxes of 5000.
3) electonic staples should have a standard "size and shape" so a supply of staples could be used be used by several programs.
(people making their own electronic staples), it may be necessary to attach a certificate to each staple or paper clip.
When a file or folder is deleted, a "recycler" program could look inside for staples or paper clips that could be reused or recycled.
1) staples could be reycled for a small credit 2) paper clips could be reused.
1) this could have some significance for office filing systems, for instance: a silver paper clip could trigger one workflow component, while a gold paper clip could trigger another.
3) "src " would allow the specification of a URL of the image to be shown, for even greater control of appearance.
4) it should be possible to specify 3D modelling of your custom paper clip, for electronic desktops being viewed through virtual reality headsets 5)
electronic paper clip sculpture 1) instead of discarding or reusing paper clips, it should be possible to "bend" them and display the resulting sculpture on the desktop 1)
a morphing interface would be suitable 2) linked chains of paper clips 3)
each paper clip should keep track of how many times it has been  bent.
Above a certain limit, the clip should fail.
This highlights or draws attention to the page.
they should not be used on data flines which might end up in the hands of very small children 1) thus, one should consider keeping them in a locked drawer of the electonic desk on home PCs 2) they should not be attached to documents on floppy disks, as they may erase portions of the floppy Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
