This note describes the Name/Finger protocol.
This is a simple protocol which provides an interface to the Name and Finger programs at several network sites.
These programs return a friendly, human oriented status report on either the system at the moment or a particular person in depth.
Currently only the SAIL (SU AI), SRI (SRI (KA/KL)), and ITS (MIT (AI/ML/MC/DMS))
sites support this protocol, but there are other systems with similar programs that could easily be made servers; there is no required format and the protocol consists mostly of specifying a single "command line".
To use via the network: ICP to socket 117 (octal, 79. decimal) and establish two 8 bit connections.
Send a single "command line", ending with <CRLF>.
Receive information which will vary depending on the above line and the particular system.
The server closes its connections as soon as this output is finished.
The command line: Systems may differ in their interpretations of this line.
However, the basic scheme is straightforward:  if the line is null (i.e. just a <CRLF> is sent) then the server should return a "default" report which lists all people using the system at that moment.
If on the other hand a user name is specified (e.g. FOO<CRLF>) then the response should concern only that particular user, whether logged in or not.
Both ITS and SAIL sites allow several names to be included on the line, separated by commas; but the syntax for some servers can be slightly more elaborate.
For example, if "/W" (called the "Whois switch") also appears on the line given to an ITS server, much fuller descriptions are returned.
The complete documentation may be found at any time in the files ".INFO.;NAME ORDER" on MIT AI, "FINGER.LES[UP,DOC]" on SU AI, and "<DOCUMENTATION>FINGER.DOC" on Name/Finger SRI KL, all freely accessible by FTP (with the exception of SRI KL, where TOPS 20 requires the "anonymous" login convention).
Allowable "names" in the command line should of course include "user names" or "login names" as defined by the system, but it is also reasonable to understand last names or even full names as well.
If a name is ambiguous, all possible derivations should be returned in some fashion; SAIL will simply list the possible names and no more, whereas an ITS server will furnish the full standard information for each possibility.
Response to null command line "default" listing: This is a request for a list of all online users, much like a TOPS 10 or TENEX "systat".
To fulfill the basic intent of the Name/Finger programs, the returned list should include at least the full names of each user and the physical locations of their terminals insofar as they can be determined.
Including the job name and idle time
(number of minutes since last typein, or since last job activity) is also reasonable and useful.
The appendix has examples which demonstrate how this information can be formatted.
Response to non null command line "name" listing: For in depth status of a specified user, there are two main cases.
If the user is logged in, a line or two is returned in the same format as that for the "default" listing, but showing only that user.
If not logged in, things become more interesting.
Furnishing the full name and time of last logout is the expected thing to do, but there is also a "plan" feature, wherein a user may leave a short message that will be included in the response to such requests.
This is easily implemented by (for example) having the program look for a specially named text file on the user's directory or some common area.
See the examples for typical "plans".
Implementation miscellany: Anyone wishing to implement such a server is encouraged to get in touch with the maintainers of NAME by sending a message to BUG NAME @ MIT AI;  apart from offering advice and help, a list of all sites with such servers is kept there.
It is also suggested that any existing programs performing similar functions locally (i.e. not as net servers) be extended to allow specification of other sites, or names at other sites.
For example, on ITS systems one can say ":
NAME<cr>" for a local default listing, or ":NAME @SAIL<cr>" for SAIL's default listing, or ":NAME Foo@MC<cr
>" to ask MIT MC about Foo's status, etc.
It should be noted that connecting directly to the server from a TIP or an equally narrow minded TELNET protocol user program can result in meaningless attempts at option negotiation being sent to the server, which will foul up the command line interpretation unless the server knows enough to filter out IAC's and perhaps even respond negatively
(IAC WON'T) to all option commands received.
This is a convenience but is not at all required, since normally the user side is just an extended NAME/FINGER type program.
And finally a little background:
The FINGER program at SAIL, written by Les Earnest, was the inspiration for the NAME program on ITS.
Earl Killian at MIT and Brian Harvey at SAIL were jointly responsible for implementing the protocol just described, and Greg Hinchliffe has recently brought up a similar server for SRI KA and SRI KL.
Appendix Examples Note: it is possible for some lines of the actual output to exceed 80 chars in length.
The handling of such lines is of course dependant on the particular user program; in these examples, lines have been truncated to 72 chars for greater clarity.
Three examples with a null command line:
Jobnam Idle TTY  Console location
Thursday, 15 Dec 77 01:21:24
PST  System up  3 Days, 22:20:52
0%  Load avs 0.26 0.23 0.31
14 Act, 10 Idle,  8 Det User    Personal Name
TI by tape drives 68 EXEC
Operators' Office Appendix Examples Examples with names specified:
Site: MIT AI Command line:
Plan: I'll be visiting another planet til about December 15.
If anyone wants to get a hold of me transmit on some fundamental wavelength (like the radius of the hydrogen atom).
DBS    T David B. Smith
GRS    U Gary R. Smith
JOS    S Julius Orion III Smith Last logout 11/29/77 06:18:18
AJS    D Arnold J. Smith
smith "SMITH" is ambiguous: RS  Bob Smith DAV Dave Smith JOS Julius Smith LCS Leland Smith Appendix Examples Site: SU AI Command line:
(1 Jul 78) Weekdays during the day I'm usually unreachable; I'm either at S.F. State or at Benjamin Franklin JHS in San Francisco, but neither place is recommended for leaving messages.
I'm generally home (55) 751 1762 unless I'm at SAIL.
I log in daily from home.
greg GREG (Greg Hinchliffe) is on the system:
Mon 12 Dec 77, 15:05, from SUMEX
GREG has no new mail, last read on Mon 12 Dec 77 15:10
