Abstract This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace that is engineered by a consortium (general contractor, Olimps LTD, and subcontractors, ABC software LTD, Microsoft Latvia LTD,
Riga Internet eXchange (RIX) Technologies LTD, and Microlink LTD) for naming information resources published and produced by the Latvian National Government Integration Project (Latvian abbreviation IVIS).
The IVIS uses and produces many kinds of information resources such as E services, E service instances, specifications, standards, working documents, and XML schemas.
An ID in IVIS has to be unique for global use every time.
Specification Template Namespace ID: "IVIS" requested according to [RFC3406].
Registration Version Number: 1 Registration Date:
2006 MM DD Declared registrant of the namespace:
Organization: ABC software LTD on behalf of The Secretariat of the Special Assignments Minister for Electronic Government Affairs Name:
Software Architect Address: Tallinas 51, Riga, LV
1012 Phone:  371 7082635 Email: j.kornienko@abcsoftware.lv Declaration of structure:
The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs assigned by the IVIS will have the following hierarchical structure (ABNF, according to [RFC4234]):
an ID generated by IVIS subsystem that is unique within this subsystem} <other
"9" Relevant ancillary documentation: IVIS ancillary documentation is under development.
: Uniqueness is guaranteed by the IVIS that issues the numbers.
The numbers are not reassigned.
Identifier persistence considerations: Persistence of identifiers is dependent upon the persistence of the system name assignment by system name holders.
Process of identifier assignment: All the assignments of identifiers are fully controlled and managed by the IVIS and its subsystems.
Process of identifier resolution: The holders of system names are responsible for operating or delegating resolution servers for the system in which they have assigned URNs.
The entire URN is case insensitive.
> could be validated by using a special IVIS database service.
ResID suffix> could be validated by an appropriate subsystem.
The following examples are not to be real.
They are provided for pedagogical purposes only.
Every Latvian ministry's local authority produces many kinds of different documents, offers public services.
Each of the information resources is already uniquely identified within an authority  producer.
URN namespace helps unify information resource identifiers by using existent Latvian government authority identification procedures to produce E services and different documents where many parties are involved.
Any citizen or organization with Internet web browser capability will be entitled to access the namespace and its associated application, registration, and resolution services.
The primary IVIS namespace usage is to identify information resources, such as XML messages, their schemas, and other resources, which can be public or have a special destination, when a few different parties are involved in the interchange.
This document includes a RUN Network Identifier (NID) registration for IVIS for entry in the IANA registry of URN NIDs (see [RFC2434] for more information).
Namespace Considerations To select necessary identifier schema, we spend a lot time and decided on URN, because an IVIS URN namespace has to resolve the following problems:
Uniqueness makes it possible to find a necessary resource and call it anytime.
Uniqueness gives stability in message sending and storing operations.
URN consists of parts, which can guarantee namespace legibility.
Information resource resolution One of the IVIS namespace parts identifies the place where the resource can be found (resolved).
Therefore, a new URN assignment is required, and individual URNs shall be assigned through the process of development of each XML schema.
There are no additional security considerations besides those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.
