Replaced by a Web Page Abstract
At one time, the RFC Editor published snapshots of the "Internet Official Protocol Standards".
These documents were known as xx00 documents, the last of which was published in May 2008.
These snapshots have been replaced by a web page, so the RFC Editor will no longer be publishing these snapshots as RFCs.
As a result, the RFC Editor will classify unpublished RFC xx00 numbers through 7000 as never issued.
Starting with the RFC number 7100, xx00 numbers will be available for assignment.
Introduction [RFC1083], published in December 1988, was the first document published in the RFC series that detailed a "list of documents that define the standards for the Internet protocol suite" and any ongoing experiments.
Snapshots were published from time to time.
[RFC1280] was the first of these publications to be published as STD 1.
Starting with [RFC2200], RFC numbers ending with 00 were reserved for snapshots of the Official Protocol Standards.
[RFC5000], published in May 2008, was the last snapshot documented in an RFC.
This document notes that the xx00 documents are being replaced by the online resource provided by the RFC Editor, and the tradition of publishing snapshots is being discontinued.
RFC numbers typically reserved for these documents (i.e., those numbers ending with 00) will be available for assignment to other RFCs to be.
Online List of Official Internet Protocol Standards
In the past, publishing a snapshot of the current list of Standards Track and Experimental documents was helpful to the Internet community, as the information was not available otherwise.
In 1996, [RFC2026] documented the IETF's desire for the periodic publication of the "Internet Official Protocol Standards".
However, in 2000, the RFC Editor produced an online list that is dynamically updated and available to individuals with access to the public Internet [STDS TRK].
As the list has been online for over 10 years, and the IETF has indicated that they no longer see a need for the snapshot document to be maintained
[RFC7100], the official list of Standards Track documents will now be provided by the online list.
STD 1 STD 1 has been in an abnormal state since RFC 5000 was published.
After consultation with the IAB, RFC 5000 was published as an Informational document, but it was still identified as STD 1 in the document header.
The status was listed as Informational because the document does not describe an implementable Standard.
However, it was associated with STD 1 to keep the document consistent with its historic connection to the subseries identifier.
The IETF has decided to move RFC 5000 (and therefore STD 1) to Historic status [RFC7100].
Marking STD 1 as Historic will result in the identifier STD 1 not being available for future use.
Cleaning Up RFC Editor Data
As part of the cleanup related to ending the series of RFC xx00 documents titled "Internet Official Protocol Standards", the RFC Editor will mark a number of unused numbers ending in 00 through RFC 7000 "never issued".
All RFC numbers ending in 00 from 7100 upwards will now be available to be assigned for any RFC.
This document does not impact the security of the Internet.
