Abstract When the Long Term Archive and Notary Services (LTANS)
working group was chartered, an object identifier arc was set aside for use by that working group.
This document describes the object identifiers that were assigned, and it establishes IANA allocation policies for any future assignments within that arc.
When the Long Term Archive and Notary Services (LTANS)
working group was chartered, an object identifier arc was set aside for use by that working group.
These object identifiers are primarily used with Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1)
} This document describes the object identifiers that were assigned, and it establishes IANA allocation policies for any future assignments within that arc.
Three subordinate object identifier arcs were used.
The first arc, id mod, was used to assign ASN.1 module identifiers.
The second arc, id ct, was used to assign Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS) content types.
The third arc, id em, was set aside for Evidence Record Syntax (ERS) encryption methods.
id ltans 0 } id ct
The Evidence Record Syntax (ERS) [RFC4998] includes two ASN.1 modules.
Both modules define the same syntax, but one module uses the 1997 ASN.1 syntax, and the other module uses the 1988 ASN.1 syntax.
These module identifiers are: id mod ers
} The Long term Archive Protocol (LTAP) [LTAP] includes two ASN.1 modules.
While this protocol was never published as an RFC, the module identifiers were assigned to facilitate implementation.
Both modules define the same syntax, but one module uses the 1997 ASN.1 syntax, and the other module uses the 1988 ASN.1 syntax.
These module identifiers are: id mod ltap88
id mod 3 0 }
{ id mod 4 0 }
The document that describes the conventions for using the Server  Based Certificate Validation Protocol (SCVP) to convey Long Term Evidence Records [RFC5276] includes one ASN.1 module.
{ id mod 5 1
} The Data Structure for the Security Suitability of Cryptographic Algorithms (DSSC)
[RFC5698] includes two ASN.1 modules.
Both modules define the same syntax, but one module uses the 1997 ASN.1 syntax, and the other module uses the 1988 ASN.1 syntax.
These module identifiers are: id mod dssc88
{ id mod 6 1 }
CMS Content Types A CMS content type for an Evidence Record was reserved, but no specification points to this value.
The Data Structure for the Security Suitability of Cryptographic Algorithms (DSSC)
[RFC5698] specifies three CMS content types.
These CMS content types are:
{ id ct 3 }
{ id ct 6 }
The Long term Archive Protocol (LTAP)
[LTAP] defines two CMS content types.
While this protocol was never published as an RFC, the CMS content types were assigned to facilitate implementation.
These CMS content types are:
An arc was set up for Evidence Record Syntax (ERS) encryption methods, and one object identifier was assigned.
However, that object identifier is obsolete, and it should not be used.
This document populates an IANA registry, and it raises no new security considerations.
The protocols that specify these values include the security considerations associated with their usage.
IANA Considerations IANA has updated one registry table and created four additional tables.
Updates to the four new tables require Expert Review, as defined in [RFC5226].
The Designated Expert is expected to ensure that any new values are strongly related to the work that was done by the LTANS WG.
Object identifiers for other purposes should not be assigned in this arc.
SMI Security for Mechanism Codes Registry
The reference in the Long Term Archive and Notary Services entry (decimal value 11) has been updated so that it points to this document.
SMI Security for LTANS Registry Within the SMI Security Codes registry, IANA has added an "SMI Security for LTANS (1.3.6.1.5.5.11)" table with three columns:
[RFC7036] Future updates to this table require Expert Review, as defined in [RFC5226].
SMI Security for LTANS Module Identifier Registry
Within the SMI Security Codes registry, IANA has added an "SMI Security for LTANS Module Identifier (1.3.6.1.5.5.11.0)" table with three columns:
Future updates to this table require Expert Review, as defined in [RFC5226].
SMI Security for LTANS CMS Content Type Registry
Within the SMI Security Codes registry, IANA has added an "SMI Security for LTANS CMS Content Type (1.3.6.1.5.5.11.1)" table with three columns:
ct evidence record  Reserved 2
Future updates to this table require Expert Review, as defined in [RFC5226].
SMI Security for LTANS ERS Encryption Method Registry
Within the SMI Security Codes registry, add an "SMI Security for LTANS ERS Encryption Method (1.3.6.1.5.5.11.2)" table with three columns:
Reserved and Obsolete Future updates to this table
require Expert Review, as defined in [RFC5226].
