Abstract This document registers the application/sql media type to be used for the Structured Query Language (SQL).
The Structured Query Language (SQL) has been in use for over 30 years with various types of database technologies.
However, there is no current media type registered for SQL.
Therefore, this document seeks to formally register the application/sql media type to be used for SQL with IANA.
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119] when they appear in ALL CAPS.
These words may also appear in this document in lowercase as English prose, absent of the normative meanings mentioned above.
This section provides the media type registration application for this media type (see [RFC6838], Section 5.6)
A Optional parameters: "charset"   indicates the character set to be used.
When not specified, a default value MUST NOT be assumed without inspection of the content.
Implementors should be aware that SQL may carry character set information in band.
In such cases, the "charset" parameter MUST NOT be used in order to avoid conflict.
In cases where no character set information is supplied in band, and the character set is known, implementors SHOULD use the "charset" parameter.
If no in band or out of band character set information is available, implementors MUST NOT specify the "charset" parameter.
If the "charset" parameter is used, the corresponding 7 bit, 8 bit, or binary encoding may be used.
If the "charset" parameter is not used, binary encoding may be required.
Security considerations: Being that SQL is a full fledged programming language and may include embedded source code for other programming languages, there is a risk of it being used to transfer malware, viruses, and other malicious payloads.
Implementors and users are encouraged only to exchange SQL files among trusted parties and utilize all available security measures, such as restricted access, virus scanners, etc., to minimize risk.
Implementors should be aware that guessing character sets, encodings, and possible conflicts between in band and out of band character set information may lead to the similar security issues as described above.
Implementors should also be aware that SQL does not provide or guarantee any sort of confidentiality and integrity checking, and SQL files can expose account information or private information about database structure and contents.
It is therefore important for applications to provide confidentiality and protection against modification by malicious third parties while in transit.
While a single standard exists ([ISO.9075.2011]), vendor implementations of the standard vary significantly.
Implementors and users should make sure that the exchanged SQL files match to the specific database/tool and version that they are using.
Published specification: The most recent specification of SQL is available in [ISO.9075.2011].
Applications that use this media type:
Databases and related tools Fragment identifier considerations: N/A Additional information:
Deprecated alias names for this type:
): sql Macintosh File Type Code(s)
: N/A Person & email address to contact for further information:
IANA Considerations IANA has registered "application/sql" in the standards tree of the "Application Media Types" registry, using the application provided in Section 3 of this document.
Security Considerations See the Security Considerations item in the registration template in Section 3, above.
