Abstract This memo updates the process for selection of Trustees for the IETF Trust.
Previously, the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC) members also acted as Trustees, but the IAOC has been eliminated as part of an update to the structure of the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA).
This memo specifies that the Trustees shall be selected separately.
This memo obsoletes RFC 4371.
The changes relate only to the selection of Trustees.
All other aspects of the IETF Trust remain as they are today.
This memo updates the process for selection of Trustees for the IETF Trust.
Previously, the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC) members also acted as Trustees, but the IAOC has been eliminated as part of an update to the structure of the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA).
This memo specifies that the Trustees shall be selected separately.
The changes relate only to the selection of Trustees.
All other aspects of the IETF Trust remain as they are today.
Section 2 copies the definition as it was in [RFC4371], only leaving out the part about Trustee selection and adding a reference to the IETF Trust website.
For a discussion of why this change is needed and a rationale for these specific changes, see [RFC8715].
IETF Trust A Trust ("the IETF Trust") has been formed for the purpose of acquiring, holding, maintaining, and licensing certain existing and future intellectual property and other property used in connection with the administration of the IETF.
The Trust was formed by the signatures of its Settlors and initial Trustees.
The Settlors, who contributed initial intellectual property to the Trust, were ISOC and the Corporation for National Research Initiatives.
The Beneficiary of the IETF Trust is the IETF as a whole.
Further details of the IETF Trust may be found at the IETF Trust's website, <https://trustee.ietf.org/>. 3.
This document revises the original Trustee selection procedures defined in [RFC4071] and [RFC4371] to eliminate the requirement that Trustees be drawn from the members of the IAOC.
In this newly revised IETF Trust structure, there will be five Trustees.
Three shall be appointed by the IETF Nominating Committee (NomCom) and confirmed by the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), one shall be appointed by the IESG, and one shall be appointed by the Internet Society (ISOC) Board of Trustees.
The appointments by the IESG and the ISOC Board of Trustees do not require confirmation.
The IETF Trust Chair informs the nominating committee of the Trustee positions to be reviewed.
The IETF Trust will provide a summary of the expertise desired of the Trustee candidates to each appointing body.
A change to the Trust Agreement is required to put this change into effect, and this document requests that the current Trustees make this change at the earliest convenient time and no later than the end of the 104th IETF meeting in March 2019.
The terms of the appointed Trustees from the IETF NomCom shall be three years.
The initial selection shall be one, two, and three year terms in order to initially stagger the terms.
The other appointments by the IESG and the ISOC Board of Trustees shall be two year terms, with the initial terms being one and two years, respectively.
The goal of the staggered initial terms is to minimize potential Trustee turnover in any single year.
To maintain the staggered terms, each appointing body may, at its discretion, appoint Trustees for shorter terms as needed in exceptional situations, e.g., for mid term vacancies or when an appointment is not ready by the time of the first IETF meeting of the year.
Once the initial Trustee selections according to the procedures in this document are complete, and at each subsequent annual meeting of the IETF Trust (once new Trustees are seated), the Trustees shall elect one Trustee to serve as IETF Trust Chair by a majority vote of the IETF Trust.
Trustees appointed by the IETF NomCom may be recalled according to the recall process described in [BCP10].
Trustees appointed by the IESG or by the ISOC Board of Directors may be recalled by the appointing body.
For appointments made by the IESG, the IESG is expected to run an open selection process and to consider the necessary skill set and conflicts of interest as part of that process.
This memo has no security implications for the Internet.
This document has no IANA actions.
