Abstract This document defines an RTP Control Protocol (RTCP)
Extended Report (XR) block that allows the reporting of de jitter buffer metrics for a range of RTP applications.
De Jitter Buffer Metrics Block
This document defines a new block type to augment those defined in [RFC3611] for use in a range of RTP applications.
The new block type provides information on de jitter buffer configuration and performance.
The metric belongs to the class of transport related end system metrics defined in [RFC6792].
Instances of this metrics block refer by synchronization source (SSRC) to the separate auxiliary Measurement Information Block [RFC6776], which contains information such as the SSRC of the measured stream, and RTP sequence numbers and time intervals indicating the span of the report.
1.2.  RTCP and RTCP Extended Reports
The use of RTCP for reporting is defined in [RFC3550].
[RFC3611] defines an extensible structure for reporting using an RTCP Extended Report (XR).
This document defines a new Extended Report block for use with [RFC3550] and [RFC3611].
Performance Metrics Framework "Guidelines for Considering New Performance Metric Development" [RFC6390] provides guidance on the definition and specification of performance metrics.
"Guidelines for Use of the RTP Monitoring Framework" [RFC6792] provides guidance on the reporting block format using RTCP XR.
Metrics described in this document are in accordance with the guidelines in [RFC6390]and [RFC6792].
Applicability Real time applications employ a de jitter buffer [RFC5481] to absorb jitter introduced on the path from source to destination.
These metrics are used to report how the de jitter buffer at the receiving end of the RTP stream behaves as a result of jitter in the network; they are applicable to a range of RTP applications.
These metrics correspond to terminal related factors that affect real time application quality and are useful for providing a better end user quality of experience (QoE) when these terminal related factors are used as inputs to calculate QoE metrics [QMB].
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
De Jitter Buffer Operation A de jitter buffer is required to absorb delay variation in the network delivery of media packets.
A de jitter buffer works by holding media data for a period of time after it is received and before it is played out.
Packets that arrive early are held in the de jitter buffer longer.
If packets arrive too early, they may be discarded if there is no available de jitter buffer space.
If packets are delayed excessively by the network, they may be discarded if they miss their playout time.
The de jitter buffer can be considered a time window with the early edge aligned with the delay corresponding to the earliest arriving packet and the late edge representing the maximum permissible delay before a late arriving packet would be discarded.
The delay applied to packets that arrive on time or at their expected arrival time is known as the nominal delay, and this is equivalent to the time difference/buffer size difference between the insertion point of the on time packets and the point at which the packets are read out.
The reference for the expected arrival time may be, for example, the first packet in the session or the running average delay.
If all packets arrived at their expected arrival time, then every packet would be held in the de jitter buffer exactly the nominal delay.
The de jitter buffer maximum delay
is the delay that is applied to the earliest arriving packet that is not discarded and corresponds to the early edge of the de jitter buffer time window.
Keep the RTP timestamp (TS) and receive time as a reference.
] Assume that both are normalized in ticks (there are 10,000 ticks in a millisecond).
RTP TS[n] RTP TS[1] and t   receive time[n] receive
If r   t, then the packet arrived on time.
If r < t, then the packet arrived late, and if r > t, then the packet arrived early.
Delay playout of packet by D
Note that this idealized implementation assumes that the sender's RTP clock is synchronized to the clock in the receiver, which is used to timestamp packet arrivals.
If there is no such inherent synchronization, the system may need to use an adaptive de jitter buffer or other techniques to ensure reliable reception.
A fixed de jitter buffer lacks provision to track the condition of the network and has a fixed size, and packets leaving the de jitter buffer have a constant delay.
For fixed de jitter buffer implementation, the nominal delay is set to a constant value corresponding to the packets that arrive at their expected arrival time, while the maximum delay is set to a constant value corresponding to the fixed size of the de jitter buffer.
An adaptive de jitter buffer can adapt to the change in the network's delay and has variable size or variable delay.
It allows the nominal delay to be set to a low value initially to minimize user perceived delay; however, it can automatically extend the late edge (and possibly also retract the early edge) of a buffer window if a significant proportion of the packets are arriving late (and hence being discarded).
De Jitter Buffer Metrics Block
This block describes the configuration and operating parameters of the de jitter buffer in the receiver of the RTP end system or RTP mixer that sends the report.
Instances of this metrics block use the SSRC to refer to the separate auxiliary Measurement Information Block [RFC6776], which describes the measurement periods in use (see [RFC6776], Section 4.2).
This metrics block relies on the measurement interval in the Measurement Information Block indicating the span of the report and MUST be sent in the same compound RTCP packet as the Measurement Information Block.
If the measurement interval is not received in the same compound RTCP packet as this metrics block, this metrics block MUST be discarded.
Report Block Structure De Jitter Buffer (DJB)
Definition of Fields in De Jitter Buffer Metrics Block Block Type (BT): 8 bits A De Jitter Buffer Metrics Report Block is identified by the constant 23.
Interval Metric flag (I): 2 bits This field is used to indicate whether the de jitter buffer metrics are Sampled, Interval, or Cumulative metrics: I 01:
the reported value is a sampled instantaneous value.
Interval Duration the reported value applies to the most recent measurement interval duration between successive metrics reports.
the reported value applies to the accumulation period characteristic of cumulative measurements.
In this document, de jitter buffer metrics can only be sampled and cannot be measured over definite intervals.
Also, the value I 00 is reserved for future use.
Senders MUST NOT use the values I 00, I 10, or I 11.
If a block is received with I 00, I 10, or
I 11, the receiver MUST discard the block.
Jitter Buffer Configuration (C): 1 bit This field is used to identify the de jitter buffer method in use at the receiver, according to the following code:
Fixed de jitter buffer 1
Adaptive de jitter buffer Reserved (resv)
: 5 bits These bits are reserved.
They MUST be set to zero by senders and ignored by receivers (see [RFC6709], Section 4.2).
The length of this report block in 32 bit words, minus one, in accordance with the definition in [RFC3611].
This field MUST be set to 3 to match the fixed length of the report block.
SSRC of Source: 32 bits As defined in Section 4.1 of [RFC3611].
De jitter buffer nominal delay (DJB nominal): 16 bits This is the current nominal de jitter buffer delay (in milliseconds) that corresponds to the nominal de jitter buffer delay for packets that arrive exactly on time.
It is calculated based on the time spent in the de jitter buffer for the packet that arrives exactly on time.
This parameter MUST be provided for both fixed and adaptive de jitter buffer implementations.
The measured value is an unsigned value.
If the measured value exceeds 0xFFFD, the value 0xFFFE MUST be reported to indicate an over range measurement.
If the measurement is unavailable, the value 0xFFFF MUST be reported.
De jitter buffer maximum delay (DJB maximum): 16 bits This is the current maximum de jitter buffer delay (in milliseconds) that corresponds to the earliest arriving packet that would not be discarded.
It is calculated based on the time spent in the de jitter buffer for the earliest arriving packet.
In simple queue implementations, this may correspond to the size of the de jitter buffer.
In adaptive de jitter buffer implementations, this value may vary dynamically.
This parameter MUST be provided for both fixed and adaptive de jitter buffer implementations.
The measured value is an unsigned value.
If the measured value exceeds 0xFFFD, the value 0xFFFE MUST be reported to indicate an over range measurement.
If the measurement is unavailable, the value 0xFFFF MUST be reported.
De jitter buffer high water mark (DJB high water mark): 16 bits
This is the highest value of the de jitter buffer nominal delay (in milliseconds) that occurred at any time during the reporting interval.
This parameter MUST be provided for adaptive de jitter buffer implementations, and its value MUST be set to DJB maximum for fixed de jitter buffer implementations.
The measured value is an unsigned value.
If the measured value exceeds 0xFFFD, the value 0xFFFE MUST be reported to indicate an over range measurement.
If the measurement is unavailable, the value 0xFFFF MUST be reported.
De jitter buffer low water mark (DJB low water mark): 16 bits This is the lowest value of the de jitter buffer nominal delay (in milliseconds) that occurred at any time during the reporting interval.
This parameter MUST be provided for adaptive de jitter buffer implementations, and its value MUST be set to DJB maximum for fixed de jitter buffer implementations.
The measured value is an unsigned value.
If the measured value exceeds 0xFFFD, the value 0xFFFE MUST be reported to indicate an over range measurement.
If the measurement is unavailable, the value 0xFFFF MUST be reported.
SDP Signaling [RFC3611] defines the use of the Session Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566] for signaling the use of XR blocks.
However, XR blocks MAY be used without prior signaling (see Section 5 of RFC 3611).
SDP rtcp xr attrib Attribute Extension
This section augments the SDP [RFC4566] attribute "rtcp xr" defined in [RFC3611] by providing an additional value of "xr format" to signal the use of the report block defined in this document.
/ xr djb block xr djb block
When SDP is used in Offer/Answer context [RFC3264], the SDP Offer/ Answer usage defined in [RFC3611] for unilateral "rtcp xr" attribute parameters applies.
For detailed usage of Offer/Answer for unilateral parameters, refer to Section 5.2 of [RFC3611].
IANA Considerations New block types for RTCP XR are subject to IANA registration.
For general guidelines on IANA considerations for RTCP XR, refer to [RFC3611].
New RTCP XR Block Type Value
This document assigns the block type value 23 in the IANA "RTP Control Protocol Extended Reports (RTCP XR) Block Type Registry" to the "De Jitter Buffer Metrics Block".
New RTCP XR SDP Parameter
This document also registers a new parameter "de jitter buffer" in the "RTP Control Protocol Extended Reports (RTCP XR) Session Description Protocol (SDP) Parameters Registry".
The contact information for registrations is: Qin Wu (sunseawq@huawei.com) 101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District Nanjing,
It is believed that this RTCP XR block introduces no new security considerations beyond those described in [RFC3611].
This block does not provide per packet statistics, so the risk to confidentiality documented in Section 7, paragraph 3 of [RFC3611] does not apply.
Contributors Geoff Hunt wrote the initial draft of this document.
Appendix A.  Metrics Represented Using the Template from RFC 6390 a.
De Jitter Buffer Nominal Delay Metric    Metric Name:
De jitter buffer nominal delay in RTP    Metric Description: The "expected arrival time" is the time that an RTP packet would arrive if there was no delay variation.
The delay applied to packets that arrive at their expected time is known as the Nominal Delay.
Method of Measurement or Calculation
: See Section 4.2, de jitter buffer nominal delay definition.
: See Section 4.2, de jitter buffer nominal delay definition.
Measurement Point(s) with Potential Measurement Domain
: See Section 4 for measurement timing and Section 4.2 for Interval Metric flag.
De jitter buffer maximum delay in RTP.
: It is the current maximum de jitter buffer delay for RTP traffic that corresponds to the earliest arriving packet that would not be discarded.
Method of Measurement or Calculation
: See Section 4.2, de jitter buffer maximum delay definition and Section 3, the last paragraph.
: See Section 4.2, de jitter buffer maximum delay definition.
Measurement Point(s) with Potential Measurement Domain
: See Section 4 for measurement timing and Section 4.2 for Interval Metric flag.
De jitter buffer high water mark in RTP.
Metric Description: It is the highest value of the de jitter buffer nominal delay for RTP traffic which occurred at any time during the reporting interval.
Method of Measurement or Calculation
: See Section 4.2, de jitter buffer high water mark definition.
: See Section 4.2, de jitter buffer nominal delay definition.
Measurement Point(s) with Potential Measurement Domain
: See Section 4 for measurement timing and Section 4.2 for Interval Metric flag.
De Jitter Buffer Low Water Mark
De jitter buffer low water mark in RTP.
Metric Description: It is the lowest value of the de jitter buffer nominal delay (for RTP traffic) that occurred at any time during the reporting interval.
Method of Measurement or Calculation
: See Section 4.2, de jitter buffer low water mark definition.
: See Section 4.2, de jitter buffer low water mark definition.
Measurement Point(s) with Potential Measurement Domain
: See Section 4, 1st paragraph.
: See Section 4 for measurement timing and Section 4.2 for Interval Metric flag.
