Abstract While RFC 2865 defines the Filter
, it requires that the Network Access Server (NAS) be pre populated with the desired filters.
However, in situations where the server operator does not know which filters have been pre populated, it is useful to specify filter rules explicitly.
This document defines the NAS Filter Rule attribute within the Remote Authentication Dial
This attribute is based on the Diameter NAS Filter Rule Attribute Value Pair (AVP) described in RFC 4005, and the IPFilterRule syntax defined in RFC 3588.
This document defines the NAS Filter Rule attribute within the Remote Authentication Dial
This attribute has the same functionality as the Diameter NAS Filter Rule AVP (400) defined in [RFC4005], Section 6.6, and the same syntax as an IPFilterRule defined in [RFC3588], Section 4.3.
This attribute may prove useful for provisioning of filter rules.
While [RFC2865], Section 5.11, defines the Filter Id attribute (11), it requires that the Network Access Server (NAS) be pre populated with the desired filters.
However, in situations where the server operator does not know which filters have been pre populated, it is useful to specify filter rules explicitly.
This document uses the following terms: Network Access Server (NAS)
A device that provides an access service for a user to a network.
RADIUS server A RADIUS authentication server is an entity that provides an authentication service to a NAS.
RADIUS proxy A RADIUS proxy acts as an authentication server to the NAS, and a RADIUS client to the RADIUS server.
If a NAS conforming to this specification receives an Access Accept packet containing a NAS Filter Rule attribute that it cannot apply, it MUST act as though it had received an Access Reject.
[RFC3576] requires that a NAS receiving a Change of Authorization Request (CoA Request) reply with a CoA NAK if the Request contains an unsupported attribute.
It is RECOMMENDED that an Error Cause attribute with value set to "Unsupported Attribute" (401) be included in the CoA NAK.
As noted in [RFC3576], authorization changes are atomic so that this situation does not result in session termination, and the pre existing configuration remains unchanged.
As a result, no accounting packets should be generated because of the CoA Request.
NAS Filter Rule Attribute Description
This attribute indicates filter rules to be applied for this user.
Zero or more NAS Filter Rule attributes MAY be sent in Access Accept, CoA Request, or Accounting Request packets.
The NAS Filter Rule attribute is not intended to be used concurrently with any other filter rule attribute, including Filter Id (11) and NAS Traffic Rule [Traffic] attributes.
NAS Filter Rule and NAS  Traffic Rule attributes MUST NOT appear in the same RADIUS packet.
If a NAS Traffic Rule attribute is present, a NAS implementing this specification MUST silently discard any NAS Filter Rule attributes that are present.
Id and NAS Filter Rule attributes SHOULD NOT appear in the same RADIUS packet.
Given the absence in [RFC4005] of well defined precedence rules for combining Filter Id and
NAS  Filter Rule attributes into a single rule set, the behavior of NASes receiving both attributes is undefined, and therefore a RADIUS server implementation cannot assume a consistent behavior.
Where multiple NAS Filter Rule attributes are included in a RADIUS packet, the String field of the attributes are to be concatenated to form a set of filter rules.
As noted in [RFC2865], Section 2.3, "the forwarding server MUST NOT change the order of any attributes of the same type", so that RADIUS proxies will not reorder NAS Filter Rule attributes.
A summary of the NAS Filter Rule Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 92 Length > 3
String The String field is one or more octets.
It contains filter rules in the IPFilterRule syntax defined in [RFC3588], Section 4.3, with individual filter rules separated by a NUL (0x00).
A NAS Filter  Rule attribute may contain a partial rule, one rule, or more than one rule.
Filter rules may be continued across attribute boundaries, so implementations cannot assume that individual filter rules begin or end on attribute boundaries.
The set of NAS Filter Rule attributes SHOULD be created by concatenating the individual filter rules, separated by a NUL (0x00) octet.
The resulting data should be split on 253 octet boundaries to obtain a set of NAS Filter Rule attributes.
On reception, the individual filter rules are determined by concatenating the contents of all NAS Filter Rule attributes, and then splitting individual filter rules with the NUL octet (0x00) as a delimiter.
The following table provides a guide to which attributes may be found in which kinds of packets, and in what quantity.
Access  Access  Access  Access    CoA
The following table defines the meaning of the above table entries. 0
This attribute MUST NOT be present in the packet. 0
Zero or more instances of this attribute MAY be present in the packet. 0
1   Zero or one instance of this attribute MAY be present in the packet.
Diameter Considerations [RFC4005], Section 6.6, defines the NAS Filter Rule AVP (400) with the same functionality as the RADIUS NAS Filter Rule attribute.
In order to support interoperability, Diameter/RADIUS gateways will need to be configured to translate RADIUS attribute 92 to Diameter NAS  Filter Rule AVP (400) and vice versa.
When translating Diameter NAS Filter Rule AVPs to RADIUS NAS Filter  Rule attributes, the set of NAS Filter Rule attributes is created by concatenating the individual filter rules, separated by a NUL octet.
The resulting data SHOULD then be split on 253 octet boundaries.
When translating RADIUS NAS Filter Rule attributes to Diameter NAS  Filter Rule AVPs, the individual rules are determined by concatenating the contents of all NAS Filter Rule attributes, and then splitting individual filter rules with the NUL octet as a delimiter.
Each rule is then encoded as a single Diameter NAS  Filter Rule AVP.
Note that a translated Diameter message can be larger than the maximum RADIUS packet size (4096 bytes).
Where a Diameter/RADIUS gateway receives a Diameter message containing a NAS Filter Rule AVP that is too large to fit into a RADIUS packet, the Diameter/RADIUS gateway will respond to the originating Diameter peer with a Result  Code AVP with the value DIAMETER
UNTRANSLATABLE (5018), and with a Failed AVP AVP containing the NAS Filter Rule AVP.
Since repairing the error will probably require re working the filter rules, the originating peer should treat the combination of a Result Code AVP with value DIAMETER RADIUS
AVP UNTRANSLATABLE and a Failed AVP AVP containing a NAS Filter Rule AVP as a terminal error.
This specification does not create any new registries.
This document uses the RADIUS [RFC2865] namespace, see <http://www.iana.org/assignments/radius types
One value has been allocated in the section "RADIUS Attribute Types".
The RADIUS attribute for which a value has been assigned is: 92 NAS Filter Rule
This document also utilizes the Diameter [RFC3588] namespace.
A Diameter Result Code AVP value for the DIAMETER RADIUS AVP UNTRANSLATABLE error has been allocated.
Since this is a permanent failure, the allocation (5018) is in the 5xxx range.
This specification describes the use of RADIUS for purposes of authentication, authorization and accounting.
Threats and security issues for this application are described in [RFC3579] and [RFC3580]; security issues encountered in roaming are described in [RFC2607].
This document specifies a new attribute that can be included in existing RADIUS packets, which are protected as described in [RFC3579] and [RFC3576].
See those documents for a more detailed description.
The security mechanisms supported in RADIUS and Diameter are focused on preventing an attacker from spoofing packets or modifying packets in transit.
They do not prevent an authorized RADIUS/Diameter server or proxy from modifying, inserting, or removing attributes with malicious intent.
Filter attributes modified or removed by a RADIUS/Diameter proxy may enable a user to obtain network access without the appropriate filters; if the proxy were also to modify accounting packets, then the modification would not be reflected in the accounting server logs.
Since the RADIUS protocol currently does not support capability negotiation, a RADIUS server cannot automatically discover whether a NAS supports the NAS Filter Rule attribute.
A legacy NAS not compliant with this specification may silently discard the NAS  Filter Rule attribute while permitting the user to access the network.
This can cause users to improperly receive unfiltered access to the network.
As a result, the NAS Filter Rule attribute SHOULD only be sent to a NAS that is known to support it.
