Abstract This document specifies the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) P Refused URI List Private Header (P Header).
This P Header is used in the Open Mobile Alliance's (OMA) Push to talk over Cellular (PoC) system.
It enables URI list servers to refuse the handling of incoming URI lists that have embedded URI lists.
This P Header also makes it possible for the URI list server to inform the client about the embedded URI list that caused the rejection and the individual URIs that form such a URI list.
The Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) has specified the Push to talk over Cellular (PoC) service, which uses the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [3] and Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) list services [5]
(more information about OMA PoC can be found at [8]).
OMA PoC needs a mechanism for servers to refuse the handling of incoming URI lists when these have embedded URI lists.
Such a mechanism is intended to be used to establish a particular type of PoC session called an ad hoc PoC group session.
The remainder of this document is organized as follows.
Section 3 describes the scenario where the mechanism will be used.
Section 4 provides an overview of the mechanism, which includes a new P Header called P Refused URI List.
Section 5 defines the syntax of this new P Header.
Section 6 specifies how to use the P Header.
Section 7 provides a usage example.
Section 8 describes the applicability of the P Header.
Security considerations are discussed in Section 9 and, finally, the IANA considerations are stated in Section 10.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].
An ad hoc PoC group session is a type of multi party PoC session.
The originator of a particular ad hoc PoC group session chooses in an ad hoc manner (e.g., selecting from an address book)
the set of desired participants.
In order to establish the ad hoc PoC group session, the originator sends an INVITE request with a URI list that contains the URIs of those participants.
The PoC network, following the procedures defined in [6], receives such an INVITE request and generates an individual INVITE request towards each of the URIs in the URI list.
In previous versions of the OMA PoC service, the originator of an ad hoc PoC group session was only allowed to populate the initial URI list with URIs identifying individual PoC users.
Later versions of the service allow the originator to also include URI lists whose entries represent URI lists.
That is, the initial URI list contains entries that are URI lists themselves.
The expected service behavior then is that the members of the embedded URI lists are invited to join the ad hoc PoC group session.
Figure 1 illustrates the desired behavior.
The originator (not shown) places the URI list friends@example.org, along with the URI alice@example.com, in the initial URI list.
The PoC network resolves friends@example.org into its members, bob@example.org and carol@example.net, and sends INVITE requests to all the recipients.
The PoC network in Figure 1 consists of PoC servers, which are SIP entities that can behave as proxies or B2BUAs (Back to Back User Agents).
There are two types of logical PoC servers: controlling and participating.
In an ad hoc PoC group session, there is always exactly one controlling PoC server.
The controlling PoC server of an ad hoc PoC group session resolves an incoming URI list and sends INVITEs to the members of the list.
The controlling PoC server also functions as the focus of the session.
Every participant in an ad hoc PoC group has an associated participating PoC server, which resides in the home domain of the participant.
Figure 2 shows how the PoC servers of the PoC network behave in the scenario shown in Figure 1.
An originating PoC user agent sends an INVITE request (1) with a URI list to its participating PoC server.
The participating PoC server of the originator receives the INVITE request, assumes the role of controlling PoC server for the ad hoc PoC group session, and sends an INVITE request to each of the URIs in the URI list.
The first URI of the list, alice@example.com, identifies a single user.
The second URI of the URI list, friends@example.org, identifies a URI list.
In PoC terminology, friends@example.com identifies a pre arranged PoC group.
The PoC server at example.org, which knows the membership of friends@example.com, cannot send INVITE requests to the members of friends@example.org because that PoC server does not act as a controlling PoC server for the ad hoc PoC group session being established.
Instead, it informs the controlling PoC server that friends@example.org is a list whose members are bob@example.org and carol@example.net.
Upon receiving this information, the controlling PoC server generates INVITE requests towards bob@example.org and carol@example.net.
Although not shown in the above example, the participating PoC server (example.org) can include   based on policy, presence of the members, etc.
just a partial list of URIs of the URI list.
Furthermore, a URI that the participating PoC server returns can be a URI list.
At present, there is not a mechanism for a participating PoC server to inform a controlling PoC server that a URI identifies a list and the members of that list, nor is there a mechanism to indicate the URIs contained in the list.
This document defines such a mechanism: the P Refused URI List P Header.
Overview of Operation When a URI list server receives an INVITE request with a URI list containing entries that are URI lists themselves, and the server cannot handle the request, it returns a 403 (Forbidden) response with a P Refused URI List P Header, as shown in Figure 3.
URI List P Header contains the members of the URI list or lists that caused the rejection of the request.
This way, the client can send requests directly to those member URIs.
[URI list in a URI list]
Syntax of P Refused URI List Header Field
The following is the augmented Backus Naur Form (BNF) [4] syntax of the P Refused
URI List P Header: P Refused URI List
"P Refused URI List" HCOLON uri list entry
( name addr / addr spec )
The members P Header parameter MUST contain a cid url, which is defined in RFC 2392 [2].
The HCOLON, SEMI, EQUAL, LDQUOT, RDQUOT, and generic param are defined in [3].
A 403 (Forbidden) response can contain more than one P Refused URI
The P Refused URI List header field MUST NOT be used with any other response.
URI List P Header contains one or more URIs, which were present in the URI list in the incoming request and could not be handled by the server.
URI List can optionally carry some or all of the members of the URI lists identified by those URIs.
The 403 (Forbidden) response MAY contain body parts which contain URI lists.
Those body parts can be referenced by the P Refused
URI List entries through their Content IDs [2].
If there is a Content ID defined in the P Refused URI List, one of the body parts MUST have an equivalent Content ID.
The format of a URI list is service specific.
This kind of message structure enables clients to determine which URI relates to which URI list, if the URI list server is willing to disclose that information.
Furthermore, the information enclosed in the URI lists enable clients to take further actions to remedy the rejection situation (e.g., send individual requests to the members of the URI list).
In the following message sequence example, a controlling PoC server sends an INVITE request to a participating PoC server.
The participating PoC server rejects the request with a 403 (Forbidden) response.
The 403 response has a P Refused URI List P Header that carries the members of the rejected URI lists that the participating PoC server determines to disclose to this controlling PoC server in the body of the message.
The INVITE request shown in Figure 4 is as follows
(Via header fields are not shown for simplicity):
Max Forwards: 70 From: PoC service
> Call ID: 7xTn9vxNit65XU7p4@example.com CSeq: 1 INVITE Contact:
recipient list invite Content Type: multipart/mixed;boundary
boundary1 Content Type: application/sdp (SDP not shown)  boundary1 Content Type: application/resource lists xml Content Disposition: recipient list <?
xml version "1.0" encoding "UTF 8"?
list@example.net in the example above are actually references to URI lists (i.e., pre arranged PoC groups).
In the following response, the URI lists are in the XML resource list format [7].
The content of the 403 (Forbidden) response in Figure 4 is as follows (Via header fields are not shown for simplicity): SIP/2.0 403
PoC service <sip:poc service@example.net>;tag 814254 Call ID:
1 INVITE P Refused URI List:
friends list@example.net; members <cid:an3bt8jf03@example.net> P Refused URI List:
colleagues list@example.net; members <cid:bn35n8jf04@example.net> Content Type: multipart/mixed;boundary
application/resource lists xml Content Disposition:
recipient list Content ID: <an3bt8jf03@example.net> <?
xml version "1.0" encoding "UTF 8"?
"urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:resource lists"> <list> <entry uri
application/resource lists xml Content Disposition:
recipient list Content ID: <bn35n8jf04@example.net> <?
xml version "1.0" encoding "UTF 8"?
Using the message body of the 403 (Forbidden) response above, the controlling PoC server can determine the members of sip:
friend list@example.net and sip:colleagues list@example.net that the participating PoC server determines to disclose to this controlling PoC server.
Furthermore, the controlling PoC server can deduce that the participating PoC server has not sent any outgoing requests, per regular URI list server procedures.
The P Refused URI List header field is intended to be used in OMA PoC networks.
This header field is used between PoC servers and carries information about those URI lists that were rejected by the server receiving the request.
The OMA PoC services is designed so that, in a given session, only one PoC server can resolve incoming URI lists and send INVITEs to members of these lists.
This restriction is not present on services developed to be used on the public Internet.
URI List P Header does not seem to have general applicability outside the OMA PoC service.
Additionally, the use of the P Refused
URI List P Header requires special trust relationships between servers that do not typically exist on the public Internet.
It is important to note that the P Refused URI List is optional and does not change the basic behavior of a SIP URI list service.
URI List only provides clients with additional information about the refusal of the request.
It is assumed that the network elements handling the P Refused URI
List P Header are trusted.
Also, attackers are not supposed to have access to the protocol messages between those elements.
This is because the P Refused URI List is intended to be used in the OMA PoC environment, which is implemented in the operators' core network; for more on OMA PoC security assumptions, see [9].
Traffic protection between network elements is achieved by using IP Security (IPsec) and sometimes by physically protecting the network.
However, implementors and administrators should be aware of two special security considerations related to the use of P
403 (Forbidden) responses may contain information about the members of a given URI list.
Eavesdroppers can acquire this information if the 403 (Forbidden) responses are not encrypted.
Therefore, it is RECOMMENDED that either hop by hop or end to end encryption (e.g., using TLS or S/MIME, respectively) is used.
Disclosing information:  A rogue entity may be able to acquire information about the members of a given URI list if the URI list server sends information about those URI lists to unauthorized users.
Therefore, it is RECOMMENDED that a URI list server discloses the content of that URI list only to authorized clients.
The IANA has made two additions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
The following header field has been added to the Header Fields sub registry.
The following header field parameter has been added to the Header Field Parameters and Parameter Values sub registry.
