Abstract The framework for MPLS in transport networks (RFC 5921) provides reference models for the MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP)
Transport Service Interfaces, which are a User to Network Interface (UNI), and a Network to Network Interface (NNI).
This document updates those reference models to show detailed reference points for these interfaces, along with further clarification of the functional architecture of MPLS TP at a UNI and NNI.
This document is a product of a joint Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) / International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU T) effort to include an MPLS Transport Profile within the IETF MPLS and Pseudowire Emulation Edge
to Edge (PWE3) architectures to support the capabilities and functionalities of a packet transport network as defined by the ITU T. 1.
The framework for MPLS in transport networks [RFC5921] provides reference models for the MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS TP)
Transport Service Interfaces, which are a User to Network Interface (UNI) and a Network to Network Interface (NNI).
This document updates those reference models to show detailed reference points for these interfaces, along with further clarification of the functional architecture of MPLS TP at a UNI and NNI.
This document is a product of a joint Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) / International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU T) effort to include an MPLS Transport Profile within the IETF MPLS and PWE3 architectures to support the capabilities and functionalities of a packet transport network as defined by the ITU T. 1.1.
Updates to the MPLS TP UNI and NNI The Transport Service Interfaces for MPLS TP are defined in Section 3.4.3 of [RFC5921].
These definitions are illustrated by showing MPLS TP Provider Edges (PEs) containing a UNI and an NNI.
The figures illustrate the UNI and the NNI as a span.
However, it is convention to illustrate these interfaces as reference points.
Furthermore, in the case of a UNI, it is useful to illustrate the distribution of UNI functions between the Customer Edge (CE) side and the PE side of the UNI, i.e., the UNI C (User to User Interface, Client side) and UNI N (User to Network Interface, Network side), in order to show their relationship to one another.
This document provides updated illustrations of the MPLS TP UNI and MPLS TP NNI to show these additional details.
These illustrations obsolete the corresponding ones in [RFC5921].
This document also defines additional terminology referenced in the illustrations.
No other updates are made by this document.
Awareness of the Transport Service layer need exist only at PE nodes, and so only these nodes are illustrated in the figures.
TP Provider (P) nodes need have no awareness of this layer.
Both PE and P nodes participate in the Transport Path layer.
A PE terminates (i.e., is a Label Edge Router (LER) with respect to)
the transport paths it supports, and is responsible for multiplexing and demultiplexing of Transport Service Instance traffic over such transport paths.
The terminology and abbreviations of [RFC5921] apply.
The following additional terminology is used in this document.
Transport Service Instance UNI   User to Network Interface UNI C User to Network Interface, Client side UNI N User to Network Interface, Network side Transport Service Instance:
A single logical point to point connection at the Transport Service layer between the ingress PE providing a packet transport service to a CE, and the corresponding egress PE to which the peer CE is attached.
MPLS TP User to Network Interface
The MPLS TP User to Network Interface (UNI) is illustrated in Figure 1.
This figure obsoletes Figure 3 of [RFC5921].
Note that the term "MPLS TP UNI" is to be interpreted as a UNI to an MPLS TP network and does not refer to the protocol transiting the UNI.
The UNI for a particular client flow may involve signaling between the CE and PE.
If signaling is used, it may traverse the same attachment circuit that supports the client flow.
Figure 1: UNI between CE Node and MPLS TP
MPLS TP Network to Network Interface
The MPLS TP Network to Network Interface (NNI) is illustrated in Figure 2.
This figure obsoletes Figure 5 of [RFC5921].
The NNI for a particular Transport Service Instance may involve signaling between the two PEs.
If signaling is used, it may traverse the same data  link that supports the service instance.
NNI between MPLS TP PE Nodes 4.
The security considerations of [RFC5921] apply.
The updated reference models provided by this document introduce no new security considerations.
