This document constitutes technical specifications for the use of Arabic in Internet domain names and provides linguistic guidelines for Arabic domain names.
It addresses Arabic specific linguistic issues pertaining to the use of Arabic language in domain names.
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) issued in March 2003 a set of RFCs for Internationalized Domain Names (IDN) ([1], [2], and [3]), which were planned to become the de facto standard for all languages.
In 2007 and 2008, the following working drafts were released that propose revisions to the IDNA protocol:  Internationalized Domain Names for Applications (IDNA):
Background, Explanation, and Rationale [5]  Internationalized Domain Names in Applications (IDNA): Protocol [6]  An updated IDNA criterion for right to left scripts [7]  The Unicode code points and IDNA [8]
These documents are known collectively as "IDNA2008".
This document constitutes a technical specification for the implementation of the IDN standards in the case of the Arabic language.
It will allow the use of standard language tables to write domain names in Arabic characters.
Therefore, it should be considered as a logical extension to the IDN standards.
It thus presents guidelines for the proper use of Arabic characters with the IDN standards in an Arabic language context.
This document reflects the recommendations of the Arab Working Group on Arabic Domain Names (AWG ADN), established by the League of Arab States (LAS), based on standardisation efforts of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (UN ESCWA) and on that group's document, "Guidelines for an Arabic Internet Domain Name" [9].
This document is also in full harmony with recent rigorous discussions that took place within the major language communities that use the Arabic script in their languages.
This document provides guidelines for the ways Arabic characters may be used for registering Internet domain names and how linguistic  specific issues should be handled.
A few rules are recommended for application at the protocol level.
The key words "MUST", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "RECOMMENDED", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [4].
Comments on this document are solicited and should be addressed to the working group's mailing list at ESCWA ICTD@un.org and/or the author(s). 2.
The main objective of the creation of Arabic domain names is to have a vehicle to increase Internet use amongst all strata of the Arabic  speaking communities.
Furthermore, a non user friendly domain name would further add to the ambiguity and the eccentricity of the Internet to the Arabic speaking communities, thus contributing negatively to the spread of the Internet and leading to further isolation of these communities at the global level.
Hence, there have been intensive efforts (especially those spearheaded by Dr. Al Zoman and contributed to by UN ESCWA and its Arabic Domain Names Task Force (ADN TF)) to reach consensus on a multitude of linguistic issues with the following goals:  To define the accepted Arabic character set to be used for writing domain names in Arabic, which is the subject of this document.
To define the top level domains of the Arabic domain name tree structure (i.e., Arabic gTLDs and ccTLDs).
This goal will be handled in a separate document.
The first meeting of the AWG ADN, held in Damascus from January  February 2005, gave special attention to the following:  Simplification of the domain names, whenever possible, to facilitate the interaction of the Arabic user with the Internet.
Adoption of solutions that do not lead to confusion either in reading or in writing, provided that this does not compromise the linguistic correctness of used words.
Mixing Arabic and non Arabic letters in the domain name label is not acceptable.
There are a number of linguistic issues that have been proposed with respect to the use of the Arabic language in domain names.
This section will highlight some of them.
This section is based on the papers of Dr. Al Zoman ([10] and [11]) and on the report of the first meeting of AWG ADN [12].
For details, the reader is encouraged to review these references.
Diacritics (Tashkeel) and Shadda Tashkeel and Shadda are accent marks placed above or below Arabic letters to produce proper pronunciation.
They are thus used to differentiate different meanings for different words with the same base characters.
Neither Tashkeel nor Shadda are permitted in zone files when registering domain names in the Arabic language, although they are permitted in the current edition of IDNA2008.
They can be supported or ignored, if necessary, in the user interface with local mappings and can be stripped before IDNA processing.
The following are their Unicode presentations: U 064B ARABIC FATHATAN U 064C ARABIC DAMMATAN
ARABIC KASRATAN U 064E ARABIC FATHA
U 064F ARABIC DAMMA U 0650
ARABIC KASRA U 0651 ARABIC SHADDA U
Kasheeda or Tatweel (Horizontal Character Size Extension) Kasheeda (U 0640 ARABIC TATWEEL) must not be used in Arabic domain names and should be disallowed for Arabic language domain names.
The Kasheeda is not a letter and does not have an effect on pronunciation.
It is used to extend the horizontal length or change the shape of the preceding letter for graphical representation purposes in Arabic writing.
Accordingly, it has no value for the writing of domain names.
The same applies to all languages using the Arabic script.
The authors recommend that it should be disallowed at the protocol level.
Character Folding Character folding is the process where multiple letters (that may have some similarity with respect to their shapes) are folded into one shape.
Examples of such Arabic characters include:  Folding Teh Marbuta (U 0629) and Heh (U 0647) at the end of a word  Folding different forms of Hamzah (U 0622, U 0623, U 0625, U 0627)
Folding Alef Maksura (U 0649) and Yeh (U 064A) at the end of a word  Folding Waw with Hamzah Above (U 0624) and Waw (U 0648)
With respect to the Arabic language, character folding is not acceptable because it changes the meaning of words and is against the principle of spelling rules.
Replacing a character valid for use in domain names with another character also valid for use in domain names, which may have a similar shape, will give a different meaning.
This will lead to only one word representing several words consisting of all the combinations of folded characters.
Hence, the other words will be masked by a single word [10].
Mis spelling or handwriting errors do occur, leading to mixing different characters despite the fact that this is not the case in published and printed materials.
One of the motivations of this effort is to preserve the language, particularly with the spread of the globalization movement.
Within this context, character folding is working against this motivation since it is going to have a negative effect on the principle and ethics of the language.
Technology should work to preserve the language and not to destroy it.
Thus, character folding should not be allowed.
The case of digits is treated in a separate section below.
A domain name to be written in Arabic must be composed of a sequence of the following UNICODE characters and the FULL STOP (u 002E) to separate the labels.
These are based on UNICODE version 5.0.
The tables below are constructed using an inclusion based approach.
Thus, characters that are not part of these tables are prohibited.
ARABIC LETTER ALEF WITH MADDA ABOVE
ARABIC LETTER ALEF WITH HAMZA
ARABIC LETTER ALEF WITH HAMZA
Supporting the Arabic Language in Domain Names
Table 1: CHARACTERS FROM UNICODE ARABIC TABLE (0600 06FF)
Supporting the Arabic Language in Domain Names
Table 2: CHARACTERS FROM UNICODE BASIC LATIN TABLE (
Arabic Linguistic Issues Affected by Technical Constraints
In this section, technical aspects of some linguistic issues are discussed.
In the Arab countries, there are two sets of numerical digits used:  Set I: (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9) mostly used in the western part of the Arab world.
Set II: (u 0660, u 0661, u 0662, u 0663, u 0664, u 0665, u 0666, u 0667, u 0668, u 0669) mostly used in the eastern part of the Arab world.
Both sets may be supported in the user interface; however, the rule of numeral homogeneity must be observed.
The rule specifies that digits from the Arabic Indic set of numerals (u 0660 to u 0669) should not be allowed to mix with ASCII digits (u 0030 to u 0039) within the same Arabic domain name label.
Thus, the appearance of a digit from one set prevents the use of any other digit from the other set.
The space character is strictly disallowed in domain names, as it is a control character.
Instead, the hyphen (Al sharta, i.e., u 02D) is proposed as a separator between Arabic words to avoid confusion that can take place if the words are typed without a separator.
It is acceptable to use the hyphen to separate between words within the same domain name label.
The proposed guidelines are in full accordance with the IETF IDN standards and take into account Arabic language specific issues within a compromise between grammatical rules of the Arabic language and ease of use of that language on the Internet.
In summary, the guidelines specify that, in Arabic domain names:  Accent marks (Tashkeel and Shadda) are not permitted.
Character folding is not permitted.
If a numeral from the Arabic Indic or ASCII digit sets appears in a label, numeral homogeneity is required.
The hyphen must be used as a word separator instead of space.
No particular security considerations could be identified regarding the use of Arabic characters in writing domain names.
In particular, any potential visual confusion between different character strings is avoided using the guidelines proposed in this document.
