Abstract Prior to the publication of RFC 2489 (which was updated by RFC 2939), several option codes were assigned to proposed Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) options that were subsequently never used.
This document lists those unused option codes and directs IANA to make these option codes available for assignment to other DHCP options in the future.
The document also lists several option codes that are not currently documented in an RFC but should not be made available for reassignment to future DHCP options.
Introduction Section 2 of this document lists the unused DHCP option codes from the IANA list of BOOTP and DHCP option codes [1].
Each option code includes any known documentation and contact information from the IANA list.
IANA will make these option codes available for assignment to other DHCP options in the future.
Section 3 lists several DHCP option codes that are not currently documented in an RFC but should not be made available for reassignment to future DHCP options.
Unused DHCP Option Codes to be Reassigned to Future DHCP Options
The option codes listed in this section are to be returned to IANA for reassignment to new options.
Responses from associated contact persons are noted where they have been received.
Service Location Protocol Naming Authority Code:
Charlie Perkins Reason to recover: Never published as standard and not in general use 2.2.
Mike Carney Reason to recover: Never published as standard and not in general use 2.4.
FQDNs in DHCP Options Code:
; agrees that option code should be reassigned Reason to recover: Never published as standard and not in general use 2.5.
Current version of "DHCP Failover Protocol" does not use a DHCP option 3.
Option codes to be reserved by IANA
The option codes listed in this section are the subject of ongoing work in the DHC Working Group (WG).
These option codes should remain on the IANA list of assigned option codes [1] until the DHC WG has made a final decision about their disposition.
Option codes used in PXE Specification
The following option codes are used in the "Preboot Execution Environment (PXE) Specification, Version 2.1" [4].
However, although these options are in widespread use by devices that use PXE, none of these option codes have been described in a published RFC.
The DHC WG will endeavor to have specifications for these options published.
Version 2.1" [4] (and an expired Internet Draft)
Dan Harrington, Michael Johnston (frenchy@quiet like a panther.org) 3.2.
The following option codes are used by devices from Apple Computer.
However, none of these option codes have been described in a published RFC.
The DHC WG will endeavor to have specifications for these options published.
: Never published in an RFC 3.2.2.
: Never published in an RFC 3.2.3.
: Never published in an RFC 3.3.
Option Code Extensions Note that these option codes are identified in "Extending DHCP Options Codes" [5] as part of a mechanism for extending the set of option codes available to DHCP.
If these option codes are not used for DHCP option code extension, they will be returned to IANA for reassignment to other DHCP options.
The option codes 99, 102 107, 109 and 111 have already been returned for reassignment to future DHCP options.
This document has no known security implications, as none of the reclaimed options are known to be in use.
IANA Considerations IANA has returned the DHCP option codes listed in Section 2 to the list of available option codes.
These option codes may be reassigned to new DHCP options, according to the procedures in RFC 2939 [6].
IANA is requested to reassign these option codes after the list of option codes that have never been assigned or have previously been returned has been exhausted.
