Abstract This specification describes how SRV records can be used to locate email services.
Introduction Internet email protocols include SMTP [RFC5321], IMAP [RFC3501], and POP3 [RFC1939].
IMAP and POP3 are both message store access protocols used by message store user agents (MUAs) to manipulate email messages after delivery.
[RFC4409] defines a "profile" of the SMTP service that is specifically used for message submission.
MUAs are expected to submit messages to mail submission agents (MSAs) using this approach.
[RFC2782] defines a DNS based service discovery protocol that has been widely adopted as a means of locating particular services within a local area network and beyond, using DNS SRV resource records (RRs).
[RFC5321] specifies how to use DNS MX RRs to locate SMTP services for a domain.
However, MUAs are expected to use the submission protocol defined in [RFC4409], which does not use MX records.
Typically MUAs have required users to enter a fully qualified domain name (FQDN) and port information for the services they need.
This is not ideal as the way in which server configuration information is specified can differ from MUA to MUA, and can be confusing to users, leading to errors when inputting the details.
Alternatively, some MUAs have adopted a complex "auto discovery" process involving probing a domain to see what services might be available.
A better approach to all this would be to require minimal information to be entered by a user that would result in automatic configuration of appropriate services for that user.
The minimal information entered would be the user's email address.
This specification defines new SRV service types for the message submission, IMAP, and POP3 services, to enable simple auto  configuration of MUAs.
The priority field of the SRV record can also be used to indicate a preference for one message store access protocol over another.
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Email related terminology from [RFC5598] is used.
This specification adds one SRV service label for message submission [RFC4409]:
submission:  Identifies an MSA using [RFC4409].
Note that this covers connections both with and without Transport Layer Security (TLS)
[RFC5246] as defined for SMTP in [RFC3207].
This specification adds two SRV service labels for IMAP [RFC3501]:
Identifies an IMAP server that MAY advertise the "LOGINDISABLED" capability and MAY
require the MUA to use the "STARTTLS" command prior to authentication.
Although these two extensions are mandatory to implement for both MUAs and IMAP servers, they are not mandatory to use by service providers.
Identifies an IMAP server where TLS [RFC5246] is initiated directly upon connection to the IMAP server.
This specification adds two SRV service labels for POP3 [RFC1939]:
Identifies a POP3 server that MAY require the MUA to use the "STLS" extension command [RFC2595] prior to authentication.
Identifies a POP3 server where TLS [RFC5246] is initiated directly upon connection to the POP3 server.
By using SRV records as above, MUAs need initially only to prompt the user for their email address [RFC5322].
The "local part" and "domain" portions are then extracted from the email address by the MUA.
The MUA uses the "domain" portion as the service domain to perform SRV lookups for the services it wants to configure.
If the SRV lookup is successful, the target FQDN and port for the service can be determined and used to complete MUA configuration.
If an SRV record is not found, the MUA will need to prompt the user to enter the FQDN and port information directly, or use some other heuristic.
In the case of multiple SRV records returned for a particular service, the MUA MUST use the priority and weight fields in the record to determine which one to use (as per [RFC2782]).
MUAs that support both POP3 and IMAP use the procedure in Section 3.4 to choose between each service when both are offered.
Subsequent to configuration, the MUA will connect to the service.
When using "imaps" or "pop3s" services, a TLS [RFC5246] negotiation is done immediately upon connection.
With "imap", "pop3", and "submission" services, the "STARTTLS", "STLS", and "STARTTLS" commands respectively are used to initiate a protected connection using TLS
When using TLS in this way, MUAs SHOULD use the TLS Server Name Indication
Certificate verification MUST use the procedure outlined in Section 6 of [RFC6125] in regard to verification with an SRV RR as the starting point.
Once a suitable connection has been made, and any required protection set up, the MUA will typically need to authenticate with the IMAP, POP3, or SMTP
The details of that are governed by the specific protocols themselves, though often times a "user identifier" is required for some form of user/password authentication.
When a user identifier is required, MUAs MUST first use the full email address provided by the user, and if that results in an authentication failure, SHOULD fall back to using the "local  part" extracted from the email address.
This is in line with the guidance outlined in Section 5.
If both these user identifiers result in authentication failure, the MUA SHOULD prompt the user for a valid identifier.
Once a successful connection and authentication have been done, MUAs SHOULD cache the service details (hostname, port, user identity) that were successfully used, and reuse those when connecting again at a later time.
If a subsequent connection attempt fails, or authentication fails, MUAs SHOULD re try the SRV lookup to "refresh" the cached data for the same protocol the client had chosen earlier; i.e., this means that the client MUST NOT change from IMAP service to POP3 (or vice versa) due to changes in the corresponding SRV priorities without user interaction.
Guidance for Service Providers Service providers wanting to offer IMAP, POP3, or SMTP
(submission) services that can be configured by MUAs using SRV records need to follow certain guidelines to ensure proper operation.
(submission) servers SHOULD be configured to allow authentication with email addresses or email local parts.
In the former case, the email addresses MUST NOT conflict with other forms of permitted user login name.
In the latter case, the email local parts need to be unique across the server and MUST NOT conflict with any login name on the server.
If the service provider uses TLS [RFC5246], the service provider MUST ensure a certificate is installed that can be verified by MUAs using the procedure outlined in Section 6 of [RFC6125] in regard to verification with an SRV RR as the starting point.
If the service provider hosts multiple domains on the same IP address, then the service provider MUST enable support for the TLS Server
Install the appropriate SRV records for the offered services.
If a user has explicitly requested a connection with a transport layer security mechanism (user interfaces sometimes present this choice as a "use SSL" or "secure connection" checkbox), the MUA MUST successfully negotiate transport layer security prior to sending an authentication command.
For example, the MUA MAY do this with "imaps", "pop3s", "imap" with "STARTTLS", or "pop3" with "STLS".
Service providers MAY offer any subset of these four options for the mail service.
A malicious attacker with access to the DNS server data, or able to get spoofed answers cached in a recursive resolver, can potentially cause MUAs to connect to any IMAP, POP3, or submission server chosen by the attacker.
In the absence of a secure DNS option, MUAs SHOULD check that the target FQDN returned in the SRV record matches the original service domain that was queried.
If the target FQDN is not in the queried domain, MUAs SHOULD verify with the user that the SRV target FQDN is suitable for use before executing any connections to the host.
Alternatively, if TLS [RFC5246] is being used for the email service, MUAs MUST use the procedure outlined in Section 6 of [RFC6125] to verify the service.
[RFC5246] typically support multiple versions of the protocol as well as the older Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol.
Because of known security vulnerabilities, email clients and email servers MUST NOT request, offer, or use SSL 2.0.
See Appendix E.2 of [RFC5246] for further details.
