Abstract This document provides specifications for one Bandwidth Constraints Model for Diffserv aware MPLS Traffic Engineering, which is referred to as the Russian Dolls Model.
Introduction [DSTE REQ] presents the Service Providers requirements for support of Diffserv aware MPLS Traffic Engineering (DS TE).
This includes the fundamental requirement to be able to enforce different Bandwidth Constraints for different classes of traffic.
[DSTE REQ] also defines the concept of Bandwidth Constraints Model for DS TE and states that "The DS TE technical solution MUST specify at least one Bandwidth Constraints Model and MAY specify multiple Bandwidth Constraints Models".
This document provides a detailed description of one particular Bandwidth Constraints Model for DS TE which is introduced in [DSTE REQ] and called the Russian Dolls Model (RDM).
[DSTE PROTO] specifies the Interior Gateway Protocol (IGP) and RSVP  TE signaling extensions for support of DS TE.
These extensions support RDM. 1.1.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
This document was the collective work of several authors.
The text and content were contributed by the editor and the co authors listed below.
(The contact information for the editor appears in the Editor's Address section.)
Inc. 1381 Kildaire Farm Road
, MA 01824 Phone:  1 978 264 4900
1 978 244 3051 EMail:
Darek Skalecki Nortel Networks 3500
1 613 765 2252 EMail: dareks@nortelnetworks.com 3.
a number of definitions from [DSTE REQ] are repeated here: Class Type (CT): the set of Traffic Trunks crossing a link that is governed by a specific set of bandwidth constraints.
CT is used for the purposes of link bandwidth allocation, constraint based routing and admission control.
A given Traffic Trunk belongs to the same CT on all links.
A pair of: i.  a Class Type ii.
a preemption priority allowed for that Class  Type.
This means that an LSP transporting a Traffic Trunk from that Class Type can use that preemption priority as the setup priority, the holding priority, or both.
A number of recovery mechanisms under investigation or specification in the IETF take advantage of the concept of bandwidth sharing across particular sets of LSPs.
"Shared Mesh Restoration" in [GMPLS RECOV] and "Facility based Computation Model" in [MPLS BACKUP] are example mechanisms that increase bandwidth efficiency by sharing bandwidth across backup LSPs protecting against independent failures.
To ensure that the notion of "Reserved (CTc)" introduced in [DSTE REQ] is compatible with such a concept of bandwidth sharing across multiple LSPs, the wording of the "Reserved (CTc)" definition provided in [DSTE REQ] is generalized into the following: Reserved (CTc):  For a given Class Type CTc ( 0 <  c <  MaxCT ), let us define "Reserved(CTc)" as the total amount of the bandwidth reserved by all the established LSPs which belong to CTc.
With this generalization, the Russian Dolls Model definition provided in this document is compatible with Shared Mesh Restoration defined in [GMPLS RECOV], so that DS TE and Shared Mesh Protection can operate simultaneously.
This assumes that Shared Mesh Restoration operates independently within each DS TE Class Type and does not operate across Class Types (for example, backup LSPs protecting Primary LSPs of CTx also need to belong to CTx; Excess Traffic LSPs sharing bandwidth with Backup LSPs of CTx also need to belong to CTx).
We also introduce the following definition: Reserved(CTb,q)
: Let us define "Reserved(CTb,q)" as the total amount of the bandwidth reserved by all the established LSPs that belong to CTb and have a holding priority of q.  Note that if q and CTb do not form one of the 8 possible configured TE Classes, then there cannot be any established LSPs that belongs to CTb and has a holding priority of q; therefore, in this case, Reserved(CTb,q)
Russian Dolls Model Definition RDM is defined in the following manner:
Maximum Number of Bandwidth Constraints (MaxBC)
Maximum Number of Class Types (MaxCT)   8 for each value of b in the range 0 <  b <
A DS TE LSR implementing RDM MUST support enforcement of Bandwidth Constraints in compliance with this definition.
Both preemption within a CT and across CTs is allowed.
Where 8 CTs are active, the RDM Bandwidth Constraints can also be expressed in the following way: All LSPs from CT7 use no more than BC7 All LSPs from CT6 and CT7 use no more than BC6 All LSPs from CT5, CT6 and CT7 use no more than BC5 etc.
"Maximum Reservable Bandwidth" Purely for illustration purposes, the diagram below represents the Russian Dolls Bandwidth Constraints Model in a pictorial manner when 3 Class Types are active:
While simpler Bandwidth Constraints models or, conversely, more flexible/sophisticated Bandwidth Constraints models can be defined, the Russian Dolls Model is attractive in some DS TE environments for the following reasons: Although it is a little less intuitive than the Maximum Allocation Model (see [DSTE MAM]), RDM is still a simple model to conceptualize.
RDM can be used simultaneously to ensure bandwidth efficiency and to protect against QoS degradation of all CTs, whether preemption is used or not.
RDM can be used in conjunction with preemption to simultaneously achieve (i) isolation across CTs (so that each CT is guaranteed its share of bandwidth no matter the level of contention by other classes), (ii) bandwidth efficiency, and (iii) protection against QoS degradation of all CTs.
RDM only requires limited protocol extensions such as the ones defined in [DSTE PROTO].
RDM may not be attractive in some DS TE environments for the following reasons: if the usage of preemption is precluded for some administrative reason, while RDM can still ensure bandwidth efficiency and protection against QoS degradation of all CTs, RDM cannot guarantee isolation across Class Types.
Additional considerations on the properties of RDM can be found in [BC CONS] and [BC MODEL].
As a simple example usage of the "Russian Dolls" Bandwidth Constraints Model, a network administrator, using one CT for Voice (CT1) and one CT for data (CT0), might configure on a given link:
(i.e., Voice   Data is limited to 2.5 Gb/s)
1.5 Gb/s (i.e., Voice is limited to 1.5 Gb/s).
Example Formulas for Computing "Unreserved TE Class [i]" with Russian Dolls Model
As specified in [DSTE PROTO], formulas for computing "Unreserved TE  Class [i]" MUST reflect all of the Bandwidth Constraints relevant to the CT associated with TE Class[i], and thus, depend on the Bandwidth Constraints Model.
Thus, a DS TE LSR implementing RDM MUST reflect the RDM Bandwidth Constraints defined in section 4 above when computing "Unreserved TE Class [i]".
As explained in [DSTE PROTO], the details of admission control algorithms, as well as formulas for computing "Unreserved TE Class [i]", are outside the scope of the IETF work.
Keeping that in mind, we provide in this section an example for illustration purposes, of how values for the unreserved bandwidth for TE Class[i] might be computed with RDM.
In the example, we assume the basic admission control algorithm, which simply deducts the exact bandwidth of any established LSP from all of the Bandwidth Constraints relevant to the CT associated with that LSP.
For readability, formulas are first shown assuming only 3 CTs are active.
The formulas are then extended to cover the cases where more CTs are used.
If CTc   CT0, then "Unreserved TE Class [i]"
If CTc   CT1, then "Unreserved TE Class [i]"
The formula can be generalized to 8 active CTs and expressed in a more compact way in the following: "Unreserved TE Class [i]"
<  b <  7, [
Receiving Both Maximum Reservable Bandwidth and Bandwidth Constraints sub TLVs [DSTE PROTO]
states that "A DS TE LSR, which does advertise BCs, MUST use the new "Bandwidth Constraints" sub TLV (in addition to the existing Maximum Reservable Bandwidth sub TLV) to do so.
" With RDM, BC0 is equal to the Maximum Reservable Bandwidth because they both represent the aggregate constraint across all CTs.
Thus, a DS TE LSR, receiving both the "Maximum Reservable Bw" sub TLV and the new "Bandwidth Constraints" sub TLV (which contains BC0) for a given link where the RDM model is used, MAY ignore the "Maximum Reservable Bw" sub TLV.
Security Considerations Security considerations related to the use of DS TE are discussed in [DSTE PROTO].
Those apply independently of the Bandwidth Constraints Model, including RDM specified in this document.
IANA Considerations [DSTE PROTO] defines a new name space for "Bandwidth Constraints Model Id".
The guidelines for allocation of values in that name space are detailed in section 13.1 of [DSTE PROTO].
In accordance with these guidelines, the IANA has assigned a Bandwidth Constraints Model Id for RDM from the range 0 239 (which is to be managed as per the "Specification Required" policy defined in [IANA CONS]).
Id 0 was allocated by IANA to RDM.
This appendix provides examples of how the Russian Dolls Bandwidth Constraints Model can be used to support each of the scenarios described in [DSTE REQ].
Limiting Amount of Voice By configuring on every link:
Bandwidth Constraint 1 (for CT1   Voice)
"certain percentage" of link capacity BC0 (for CT1 Voice   CT0 Data)
link capacity By configuring: every CT1/Voice TE LSP with preemption   0
every CT0/Data TE LSP with preemption   1 DS TE with the Russian Dolls Model will address all the requirements: amount of Voice traffic limited to desired percentage on every link data traffic capable of using all remaining link capacity voice traffic capable of preempting other traffic A.2.
: Maintain Relative Proportion of Traffic Classes By configuring on every link: BC2 (for CT2)
e.g., 45% BC1 (for CT1 CT2)
e.g., 80% BC0 (for CT0 CT1 CT2)
e.g., 100% DS TE with the RDM will ensure that the amount of traffic of each CT established on a link is within acceptable levels as compared to the resources allocated to the corresponding Diffserv Per Hop Behaviors (PHBs) regardless of which order the LSPs are routed in, regardless of which preemption priorities are used by which LSPs and regardless of failure situations.
By also configuring: every CT2/Voice TE LSP with preemption   0
every CT1/Premium Data TE LSP with preemption   1
every CT0/Best Effort TE LSP with preemption   2 DS TE with the Russian Dolls Model will also ensure that: CT2 Voice LSPs always have first preemption priority in order to use the CT2 capacity CT1 Premium Data LSPs always have second preemption priority in order to use the CT1 capacity Best Effort can use up to link capacity of what is left by CT2 and CT1.
Optional automatic adjustment of Diffserv scheduling configuration could be used for maintaining very strict relationships between the amounts of established traffic of each Class Type and corresponding Diffserv resources.
At the same time, it will allow traffic engineering of the rest of the traffic such that links can be filled up.
Editor's Address Francois Le Faucheur Cisco Systems,
Inc. Village d'Entreprise Green Side Batiment T3 400, Avenue de Roumanille 06410
Biot Sophia Antipolis France Phone:  33 4 97
