Abstract This document registers with IANA two new DNS SRV protocol labels for resolving Instant Messaging and Presence services with SIP.
The Service Record (SRV) [RFC2782] identifies the host(s)
that will support particular services.
The DNS is queried for SRV RR in the general form:  Service.
Name Service: the symbolic name of the desired service Proto: the protocol of the desired service Name: the domain name for which this record is valid "Address Resolution for Instant Messaging and Presence"
[RFC3861] provides guidance for locating the services associated with URIs that employ the following two URI schemes [RFC3986]: 'i
In order to ensure that the association between " im" and " pres" and their respective underlying services are deterministic, the IANA has created two independent registries: the Instant Messaging SRV Protocol Label registry and the Presence SRV Protocol Label registry.
This document defines and registers the " sip" protocol label in both registries so that computer programs can resolve '
URIs down to SIP addresses.
Moreover, this document explains how the use of SIP for Presence and Instant Messaging uses SRV. 2.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
DNS SRV Usage of SIP with 'i
Although there are standard procedures for resolving 'i
m' and 'pres' URIs (Section 3 of [RFC3861])
, the labels for SIP are not registered.
Section 5 of [RFC3428] states that if a user agent (UA) is presented with an IM URI (e.g., "im:fred@example.com") as the address for an instant message, it SHOULD resolve it to a SIP URI, and place the resulting URI in the Request URI of the MESSAGE request before sending.
Following the procedures defined in [RFC3861], in order to resolve the IM URI, the UA performs a SRV lookup for:
Assuming that the example.com domain offers a SIP service for instant messaging at simple.example.com, this will result in a resolution of
Thus, the instant messaging URI im:fred@example.com would resolve to a SIP URI of sip:fred@simple.example.com.
SIP supports both pager [RFC3428] and session [RFC4975] IM mode.
However, a DNS SRV lookup does not specify which SIP IM mode a domain offer.
If the user agent client (UAC) supports both session mode and pager mode, it is then suggested to try session mode first; if that mode is rejected, the UAC has to be ready to fall back to pager mode.
Section 5 of [RFC3856] states that procedures defined in [RFC3861] are also used to resolve the protocol independent PRES URI for a presentity (e.g., "pres:fred@example.com") into a SIP URI.
Following the procedures defined in [RFC3861], in order to resolve the PRES URI, the UA performs a SRV lookup for:  pres.
Assuming that the example.com domain offers a SIP presence service at simple.example.com, this will result in a resolution of  pres.
Thus, the protocol  independent PRES URI pres:fred@example.com would resolve to a SIP URI of sip:fred@simple.example.com.
This document merely serves for the registration of DNS SRV labels in the appropriate IANA registry.
The document does not specify a protocol; therefore, there are no security issues associated with it.
This specification registers a new SRV protocol label in both the Instant Messaging SRV Protocol Label registry and the Presence SRV Protocol Label registry.
Instant Messaging SRV Protocol Label Registration "Address Resolution for Instant Messaging and Presence" [RFC3861] defines an Instant Messaging SRV Protocol Label registry for protocols that can provide services that conform to the " im" SRV Service label.
Because SIP is one such protocol, IANA registers the " sip" protocol label in the "Instant Messaging SRV Protocol Label Registry", as follows: Protocol label:   sip Specification:  RFC 5509
Description:  Instant messaging protocol label for the use of SIP for Presence and Instant Messaging protocol as defined by [RFC3428].
Registrant Contact:  Salvatore Loreto <salvatore.loreto@ericsson.com
Presence SRV Protocol Label Registration "Address Resolution for Instant Messaging and Presence" [RFC3861] defines a Presence SRV Protocol Label registry for protocols that can provide services that conform to the " pres" SRV Service label.
Because the use of SIP for Presence and Instant Messaging is one such protocol, the IANA registers the " sip" protocol label in the "Presence SRV Protocol Label Registry", as follows: Protocol label:   sip Specification:  RFC
5509 Description:  Presence protocol label for the use of SIP for Presence and Instant Messaging protocol as defined by [RFC3856].
