Abstract This memo creates a number of OSPF registries and provides guidance to IANA for assignment of code points within these registries.
This memo defines various OSPF registries for IANA to set up and maintain for OSPF code points.
In some cases, this memo defines ranges of code point values within these registries; each such range has a different assignment policy.
The terms used in describing the assignment policies are as follows:  Standards Action  Experimentation  Vendor
Reserved Standards Action means that assignments in that range MUST only be made for Standards Track RFCs (as defined in [RFC2434]).
Some of the registries defined below reserve a range of values for Experimentation.
For guidelines regarding the use of such values see [RFC3692].
Values from this range MUST NOT be assigned by IANA.
Further guidance on the use of the Experimentation range may be found in paragraphs 4, 5, and 6 of [RFC3692].
An implementation MAY choose to not support values from the Experimentation range.
In such a case, the protocol data structure with a code point from the Experimentation range is ignored, unless other protocol machinery says how to deal with it.
"Ignored" in this context means that the associated data structure is removed from the received packet before further processing, including flooding.
Values set aside as Vendor Private Use MUST NOT be assigned by IANA.
A protocol data structure whose code point falls in this range MUST have a disambiguating field identifying the Vendor.
This identifier consists of four octets of the Vendor's SMI (Structure of Management Information) enterprise code (see [ENTERPRISE NUMBERS]) in network byte order; the location of this code must be well defined per data structure.
An implementation that encounters a Vendor Private code point SHOULD check whether the enterprise code is one that it recognizes; if so, the implementation MAY choose to interpret the code point and data structure.
Otherwise, it SHOULD ignore the code point, unless the protocol machinery says how to deal with the data structure (as defined in the previous paragraph).
This allows multiple vendor private extensions to coexist in a network.
Values in the Reserved range MUST NOT be assigned until a Standards Track or Best Common Practices RFC is published defining the assignment policy for that range.
This RFC MUST be the product of the OSPF Working Group; if the OSPF WG is terminated, then it MUST be reviewed by an Expert Reviewer designated by the IESG.
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
This section lists the various registries for OSPF protocol code points.
Note that some of these are for OSPF, and some are specific to a particular version of OSPF; also, some registries predate this memo.
Registries that are specific to one version of OSPF reflect the version number in the registry name (e.g., OSPFv2 Options).
A registry whose name does not mention a version number applies to both OSPFv2 and OSPFv3
OSPFv2 Options (Defined in Section A.2 of [RFC2328], updated in Section A.1 of [RFC2370].
OSPFv3 Options (Defined in Section A.2 of [RFC2740])
OSPF Packet Type (Both v2 and v3)
(Defined in Section A.3.1 of [RFC2328])
(Defined in Section A.3.1 of [RFC2328])
(Note: this registry is called "OSPF AUTHENTICATION CODES" by IANA.)
Link State (LS) Type (Defined in Section A.4.1 of [RFC2328])
If a new LS Type is documented, the documentation MUST say how the Link State ID is to be filled in, what the flooding scope of the LSA (Link State Advertisement) is, and how backward compatibility is maintained.
There is no range for Vendor Private Use, as there is no space for an enterprise code to identify the Vendor.
No Experimental range is defined, due to possible backwards compatibility issues.
If a new Router LSA Link Type is documented, the documentation SHOULD say how the Link State ID, Link ID, and Link Data fields are to be filled in, and how backward compatibility is maintained.
(Defined in Section A.4.2 of [RFC2328], updated in [RFC3101])
This 8 bit field in the Router LSA is unnamed; it is the field immediately following the Router LSA length.
This registry is created by [OSPF CAP].
This document provides the values to be populated for values defined in Section A.4.2.1 of [RFC2740].
Prefix Options (Defined in Section A.4.1.1 of [RFC2740])
Router LSA Link Type (
Defined in Section A.4.3 of [RFC2740])
There is no range for Vendor Private Use, as there is no space for an enterprise code to identify the Vendor.
No Experimental range is defined, due to possible backwards compatibility issues.
Opaque LSA Type (Defined in Section A.2 of [RFC2370])
(Note: this registry is called "OSPF Opaque LSA Option" by IANA.
In an OSPFv2 Opaque LSA with Opaque LSA Type in the Vendor Private Use range, the first four octets of Opaque Information MUST be the Vendor enterprise code.
A document defining a new Standards Track Opaque LSA with TLVs and sub TLVs MUST describe ranges and assignment policies for these TLVs.
Grace LSA Top Level TLVs
(Defined in Appendix A of [RFC3623])
In a Grace LSA, if a top level TLV has a Type from the Vendor Private Use range, the Length MUST be at least four, and the first four octets of the Value field MUST be the Vendor enterprise code.
The lack of adequate IANA guidelines may be viewed as an avenue for Denial of Service attacks on IETF protocols (in this case, OSPFv2 and OSPFv3), and on the IETF Standards Process in general.
This memo attempts to close this loophole for OSPFv2 and OSPFv3.
Authors contemplating extensions to OSPF SHOULD examine such extensions carefully, and consider whether new registries are needed, and if so, allocation policies within each registry.
This document specifies assignment policy for several existing IANA registries and creates several more.
Options Registry Section 2.1 defines the policy for allocation of bits from this registry as "Standards Action".
There are only 8 bits in this field, and 6 are already assigned.
The initial registry contents are given below.
Options Registry Section 2.2 defines the policy for allocation of bits from this registry as "Standards Action".
There are 24 bits in this field, and 6 are assigned.
The initial registry contents are given below.
OSPF Packet Type Registry Section 2.3 defines the policy for allocation of values from this registry for different ranges.
The initial registry contents are given below.
OSPF Packet Type (Section 2.3)
This registry already exists at IANA, called "ospf authentication  codes".
Section 2.3.1 defines the policy for allocation from this registry for different ranges.
OSPFv2 Link State Type Registry Section 2.4 defines the policy for allocations from this registry for different ranges.
The initial registry contents are given below.
Link State (LS) Type (Section 2.4)
Router LSA Link Type Registry Section 2.4.1 defines the policy for allocations from this registry for different ranges.
The initial registry contents are given below.
Router LSA Link Type (Section 2.4.1)
Router Properties Registry Section 2.4.2 defines the policy for allocation of bits from this registry as "Standards Action".
There are only 8 bits in this field, and 5 are already assigned.
The initial registry contents are given below.
OSPFv3 LSA Function Code Registry
This registry is created by [OSPF CAP], which also defines the registration policy.
This section contains values that belong in this registry that were defined by [RFC2740].
As defined in [RFC2740], the first 3 bits of the LSA Function Code are the U, S1, and S2 bits.
A given function code implies a specific setting for the U, S1, and S2 bits as shown in the "LS Type" column.
The U bit indicates how the LSA should be handled by a router which does not recognize the LSA's function code.
Its values are: U bit
as if type understood The S1 and S2 bits indicate the flooding scope of the LSA.
it is originated on 0  1  Area Scoping.
Flooded to all routers in the originating area
Flooded to all routers in the AS 1  1
The initial registry contents are given below.
LSA Function Code (Section 2.5)
LSA Function Code LS Type Description
Inter Area Prefix LSA [RFC2740]
Inter Area Router LSA [RFC2740]
Intra Area Prefix LSA [RFC2740] 5.9.
Prefix Options Registry Section 2.5.1 defines the policy for allocation of bits from this registry as "Standards Action".
There are only 8 bits in this field, and 4 are already assigned.
The initial registry contents are given below.
Prefix Options Registry (Section 2.5.1)
OSPFv3 Router LSA Link Type Registry Section 2.5.2 defines the policy for allocations from this registry for different ranges.
The initial registry contents are given below.
Router LSA Link Type (Section 2.5.2)
OSPFv2 Opaque LSA Type Registry
This registry already exists at IANA, called "ospf opaque types".
Section 2.6 defines the policy for allocation from this registry for different ranges.
OSPFv2 Grace LSA Top Level TLV Registry Section 2.6.1 defines the policy for allocations from this registry for different ranges.
The initial registry contents are given below.
Grace LSA Top Level TLV (Section 2.6.1)
