Abstract This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace for the Open IPTV Forum (OIPF) for naming persistent resources defined within OIPF specifications.
Example resources include technical documents and specifications, eXtensible Markup Language (XML) schemas, classification schemes, XML Document Type Definitions (DTDs), namespaces, style sheets, media assets, and other types of resources produced or managed by the OIPF.
The Open IPTV Forum (OIPF) is a pan industry initiative with the purpose of producing end to end specifications for IPTV that will take the next generation of IPTV into the mass market.
The Forum, which is fully open to participation from the communications, entertainment, and other relevant industries, will focus on the development of specifications that will help streamline and accelerate deployments of IPTV technologies and will maximize the benefits of IPTV for consumers, network operators, content providers, service providers, consumer electronics manufacturers, and home and network infrastructure providers.
The main objective of the Open IPTV Forum is to produce end to end specifications for IPTV including:  Architecture and interfaces  Network and terminal functionality
Technology choices for all major functionalities  A common UNI (User Network Interface) for the Open Internet and Managed Networks
Certification of equipment, including end user devices and service provider offerings
The end to end specifications support:
A variety of IPTV and Internet multimedia services  Managed networks and the Open Internet  Integration with communication services  Convergence of IPTV and multimedia services across different access technologies
Easy integration of third party content offerings  Authentication and content protection
Various devices in the home network
The OIPF is basing its end to end IPTV specifications on relevant standards produced by other bodies and is collaborating with them to encourage convergence where appropriate and address any shortcomings or gaps.
In the creation of the end to end IPTV specification, some new resources need to be defined.
The OIPF would like to assign unique, permanent, location independent names based on URNs for some resources it produces or manages.
These URNs will be constructed according to the URN syntax defined in [RFC2141].
This namespace specification is for a formal namespace to be registered according to the procedures set forth in [RFC3406].
2.  URN Specification for the OIPF Namespace Identifier (NID)
This section provides the information required to register a formal namespace according to the registration procedure defined in [RFC3406].
The URNs conform to the syntax defined in [RFC2141].
Namespace ID: "oipf" Registration Information:
08 13 Declared registrant of the namespace:
Route des Lucioles 06921 Sophia Antipolis Cedex, France Phone:
: URNs assigned by the OIPF will have the following structure based on the organizational structure of the resources specified in the OIPF IPTV Solution specifications: urn:oipf:<NSS
> where the syntax of "<NSS>" is specified in Section 2.2 of the URN Syntax requirements ([RFC2141]).
The individual URNs will be assigned by the OIPF through the process of development of OIPF specifications.
Identifier uniqueness considerations: The OIPF will establish unique identifiers as appropriate and will ensure that an assigned string is never reassigned.
Identifier persistence considerations: The OIPF is committed to maintaining the accessibility and persistence of all resources that are officially assigned URNs by the organization.
The registration tables and information will be published and maintained by the OIPF on its website.
Process of identifier assignment: The assignment of identifiers is fully controlled and managed by the OIPF.
Process of identifier resolution: Not applicable; the "oipf" namespace is not listed with a Resolution Discovery System.
The "<NSS>" is case insensitive.
Conformance with URN Syntax: No special considerations.
URN assignment will be managed completely and published by the OIPF.
The following examples of schemas and classification schemes are taken from the current OIPF Release 1 IPTV Solution specification: urn:
A unique formal namespace is required by the OIPF in order to specify how the various existing standards can be linked in order to create a true end to end ecosystem for standards based IPTV deployments and to provide the necessary system wide resources.
URN assignment procedures: The individual URNs shall be assigned through the process of development of OIPF specifications by the Open IPTV Forum (OIPF)
The latest information about OIPF defined specifications can always be found at the owner's website at <http://www.oipf.tv/specifications> URN resolution/delegation: The resolution and delegation shall be determined through the process of development of specifications by the Open IPTV Forum.
Since the implementations envisaged cover a wide range of devices with quite different access methods and capabilities, no single resolution or delegation mechanism can be referenced in this document.
Types of resources to be identified: Types of resources to be identified include XML schema definition files, classification schemes, and identification systems defined and published by the OIPF.
These resources being identified constitute a metadata system to describe digital multimedia broadcast services or content conveyed as part of such services.
The latest OIPF defined specifications can always be found at <http://www.oipf.tv/specifications> 5.
Community Considerations URNs defined by the OIPF will be used by implementers of IPTV systems, services, products, and applications based on the OIPF IPTV Solution specification.
They are an essential component of the open IPTV ecosystem that is being facilitated by the OIPF.
There are no additional security considerations other than those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general, which are described in [RFC1737], [RFC2141], and [RFC3406].
This document registers a namespace for URNs.
OIPF may assign special meaning to certain characters of the Namespace Specific String (NSS) in its specifications.
Any security considerations resulting from such an assignment is outside the scope of this document.
This document defines a URN NID registration of "oipf".
IANA has included it in the "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespaces" registry with a value of 47.
