Abstract When dealing with large amounts of users and many IMAP4
[RFC 2060] servers, it is often necessary to move users from one IMAP4 server to another.
For example, hardware failures or organizational changes may dictate such a move.
Login referrals allow clients to transparently connect to an alternate IMAP4 server, if their home IMAP4 server has changed.
A referral mechanism can provide efficiencies over the alternative 'proxy method', in which the local IMAP4 server contacts the remote server on behalf of the client, and then transfers the data from the remote server to itself, and then on to the client.
The referral mechanism's direct client connection to the remote server is often a more efficient use of bandwidth, and does not require the local server to impersonate the client when authenticating to the remote server.
Conventions used in this document In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and server respectively.
A home server, is an IMAP4 server that contains the user's inbox.
A remote server is a server that contains remote mailboxes.
Introduction and Overview IMAP4 servers that support this extension MUST list the keyword LOGIN REFERRALS in their CAPABILITY response.
No client action is needed to invoke the LOGIN REFERRALS capability in a server.
A LOGIN REFERRALS capable IMAP4 server
SHOULD NOT return a referral to a server that will return a referral.
A client MUST NOT follow more than 10 levels of referral without consulting the user.
A LOGIN REFERRALS response code MUST contain as an argument a valid IMAP server URL as defined in [IMAP URL].
A home server referral consists of either a tagged NO or OK, or an untagged BYE response that contains a LOGIN REFERRALS response code.
A001 NO [REFERRAL IMAP://user;AUTH  @SERVER2/]
user;AUTH   is specified as required by [IMAP URL] to avoid a client falling back to anonymous login.
Home Server Referrals A home server referral may be returned in response to an AUTHENTICATE or LOGIN command, or it may appear in the connection startup banner.
If a server returns a home server referral in a tagged NO response, that server does not contain any mailboxes that are accessible to the user.
If a server returns a home server referral in a tagged OK response, it indicates that the user's personal mailboxes are elsewhere, but the server contains public mailboxes which are readable by the user.
After receiving a home server referral, the client can not make any assumptions as to whether this was a permanent or temporary move of the user.
LOGIN and AUTHENTICATE Referrals An IMAP4 server MAY respond to a LOGIN or AUTHENTICATE command with a home server referral if it wishes to direct the user to another IMAP4 server.
Specified user is invalid on this server.
A001 LOGIN MATTHEW PASSWORD S:
Specified user's personal mailboxes located on Server2, but public mailboxes are available.
A001 AUTHENTICATE GSSAPI <authentication exchange
A001 NO [REFERRAL IMAP://user;AUTH GSSAPI@SERVER2/]
Specified user is invalid on this server.
BYE at connection startup referral An IMAP4 server MAY respond with an untagged BYE and a REFERRAL response code that contains an IMAP URL to a home server if it is not willing to accept connections and wishes to direct the client to another IMAP4 server.
The following syntax specification uses the augmented Backus Naur Form (BNF) as described in [ABNF].
This amends the "resp text code" element of the IMAP4 grammar described in [RFC 2060]
> ; See [IMAP URL] for definition of <imapurl> ; See [RFC 2060] for base definition of resp text code 6.
The IMAP4 login referral mechanism makes use of IMAP URLs, and as such, have the same security considerations as general internet URLs [RFC 1738], and in particular IMAP URLs [IMAP URL].
A server MUST NOT give a login referral if authentication for that user fails.
This is to avoid revealing information about the user's account to an unauthorized user.
With the LOGIN REFERRALS capability, it is potentially easier to write a rogue 'password catching' server that collects login data and then refers the client to their actual IMAP4 server.
Although referrals reduce the effort to write such a server, the referral response makes detection of the intrusion easier.
