Abstract This document describes the "about" URI scheme, which is widely used by Web browsers and some other applications to designate access to their internal resources, such as settings, application information, hidden built in functionality, and so on.
This document describes the "about" Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) scheme.
The "about" URI scheme is currently widely used by Web browsers to designate access to their internal resources, such as settings, application information, and so called "Easter eggs" (i.e., a hidden feature or joke in an application).
The "about" URI syntactically conforms to the <
The resource that is referenced by a particular "about" URI is denoted by the <about token> part of the URI.
It is not a hierarchical element for a naming authority.
The <about query> part specifies additional information about its handling and/or the information that should be returned by the resource referenced by the URI.
It is impossible to specify a binding between all the possible tokens and the semantics of "about" URIs that would contain such tokens.
Therefore, the resource referenced by the URI is generally considered to be specific to a Web browser implementation.
Well Known "about" URIs Some <about token>s have been reserved, as the behavior of the resource that is referenced is well known (well known tokens).
A well known "about" URI is a URI that has a well known token as its <about token> part.
It is recommended that such URIs be handled in accordance with the specification referenced in the "about" URI Tokens registry (see Section 5.2).
Well known "about" URIs are intended to be registered when there is a need to codify the behavior of a particular <about token>. 2.3.
Encoding Considerations "about" URIs are subject to encoding rules as defined in RFC 3986 [RFC3986].
" This document defines one
blank" URI refers to a resource represented in the browser by a blank page.
Security Considerations Security considerations for URIs are discussed in Section 7 of RFC 3986 [RFC3986].
However, most of those provisions do not apply to the "about" URI scheme, as they are mainly scoped to schemes used in the Internet. "
about" URIs can sometimes refer to sensitive information, such as user passwords stored in a cache, or parameters that, if changed, could affect a user's data.
The application therefore needs to ensure that the user's data is secured and no threats are imposed by "about" URIs.
The "about" URI scheme has been registered in the "Permanent URI Schemes" registry.
The information below is provided according to the guidelines from RFC 4395 [RFC4395]: URI scheme name: about Status: Permanent URI scheme syntax:
See Section 2.1 of RFC 6694.
: See Section 2.2 of RFC 6694.
: See Section 2.3 of RFC 6694.
Applications that use the scheme: "about" URIs are predominantly used by Web browsers.
: See Section 4 of RFC 6694.
IETF Applications Area Directors <app
> (on behalf of the IETF)
: See Section 6 of RFC 6694.
A Registry for Well Known Tokens
This document creates the '"about" URI Tokens' registry.
The registry entries consist of three fields:
The Token field has to conform to <about token> production as defined in Section 2.1.
The registration policy for this registry is "First Come First Served", as described in RFC 5226 [RFC5226].
The registrant of the token should provide the information mentioned in the following registration template:
The desired well known token to be used in "about" URIs.
A short description of how "about" URIs with the registered token are handled, including information about the referenced resource.
Contact/change controller:  Person (including contact information) authorized to change this registration.
A stable reference to a document that specifies the registered "about" URI.
The question of interoperability does not arise.
The key motivation is to have a reference to a specification documenting well known behavior of the "about" URI in Web browsers.
As a rule of thumb, if the behavior is common to two or more Web browser implementations, it can be considered well known.
An existing assignment may be duplicated if the registered token is used in more than one Web browser implementation.
The following is a template for the "blank" token:
Registered token:  blank  Intended usage:
blank URI references a blank page.
(on behalf of the IETF).
