Abstract This memo defines a set of extensions which instrument RADIUS authentication client functions.
These extensions represent a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
Using these extensions IP based management stations can manage RADIUS authentication clients.
This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in the Internet community.
In particular, it describes managed objects used for managing RADIUS authentication clients.
Today a wide range of network devices, including routers and NASes, act as RADIUS authentication clients in order to provide authentication and authorization services.
As a result, the effective management of RADIUS authentication clients is of considerable importance.
The SNMP Management Framework presently consists of five major components:   An overall architecture, described in RFC 2571 [1].
Mechanisms for describing and naming objects and events for the purpose of management.
The first version of this Structure of Management Information (SMI) is called SMIv1 and described in STD 16, RFC 1155 [2], STD 16, RFC 1212 [3] and RFC 1215 [4].
The second version, called SMIv2, is described in STD 58, RFC 2578 [5], RFC 2579 [6] and RFC 2580 [7].
Message protocols for transferring management information.
The first version of the SNMP message protocol is called SNMPv1 and described in STD 15, RFC 1157 [8].
A second version of the SNMP message protocol, which is not an Internet standards track protocol, is called SNMPv2c and described in RFC 1901 [9] and RFC 1906 [10].
The third version of the message protocol is called SNMPv3 and described in RFC 1906 [10], RFC 2572 [11] and RFC 2574 [12].
Protocol operations for accessing management information.
The first set of protocol operations and associated PDU formats is described in STD 15, RFC 1157 [8].
A second set of protocol operations and associated PDU formats is described in RFC 1905 [13].
A set of fundamental applications described in RFC 2573 [14] and the view based access control mechanism described in RFC 2575 [15].
Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed the Management Information Base or MIB.
Objects in the MIB are defined using the mechanisms defined in the SMI.
This memo specifies a MIB module that is compliant to the SMIv2.
A MIB conforming to the SMIv1 can be produced through the appropriate translations.
The resulting translated MIB must be semantically equivalent, except where objects or events are omitted because no translation is possible (use of Counter64).
Some machine readable information in SMIv2 will be converted into textual descriptions in SMIv1 during the translation process.
However, this loss of machine readable information is not considered to change the semantics of the MIB.
The RADIUS authentication protocol, described in [16], distinguishes between the client function and the server function.
In RADIUS authentication, clients send Access Requests, and servers reply with Access Accepts, Access Rejects, and Access Challenges.
Typically NAS devices implement the client function, and thus would be expected to implement the RADIUS authentication client MIB, while RADIUS authentication servers implement the server function, and thus would be expected to implement the RADIUS authentication server MIB.
However, it is possible for a RADIUS authentication entity to perform both client and server functions.
For example, a RADIUS proxy may act as a server to one or more RADIUS authentication clients, while simultaneously acting as an authentication client to one or more authentication servers.
In such situations, it is expected that RADIUS entities combining client and server functionality will support both the client and server MIBs.
This MIB module contains two scalars as well as a single table: (1)  the RADIUS Authentication Server Table contains one row for each RADIUS authentication server that the client shares a secret with.
Each entry in the RADIUS Authentication Server Table includes fifteen columns presenting a view of the activity of the RADIUS authentication client.
IMPORTS MODULE IDENTITY, OBJECT TYPE, OBJECT IDENTITY, Counter32, Integer32, Gauge32, IpAddress,
MIB MODULE COMPLIANCE, OBJECT GROUP  FROM SNMPv2 CONF;
radiusAuthClientMIB MODULE IDENTITY LAST UPDATED "9906110000Z"   11 Jun 1999 ORGANIZATION "IETF RADIUS Working Group.
CONTACT INFO " Bernard Aboba Microsoft
One Microsoft Way Redmond, WA  98052 US Phone:  1 425 936 6605 EMail:
The MIB module for entities implementing the client side of the Remote Access Dialin User Service (RADIUS) authentication protocol."
The OID assigned to RADIUS MIB work by the IANA."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
MAX ACCESS not accessible STATUS
current DESCRIPTION "The (conceptual) table listing the RADIUS authentication servers with which the client shares a secret."
MAX ACCESS not accessible STATUS
An entry (conceptual row) representing a RADIUS authentication server with which the client shares a secret."
MAX ACCESS not accessible STATUS
The IP address of the RADIUS authentication server referred to in this table entry."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION "
The UDP port the client is using to send requests to this server."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
"The time interval (in hundredths of a second) between the most recent Access Reply/Access Challenge and the Access Request that matched it from this RADIUS authentication server."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
"The number of RADIUS Access Request packets sent to this server.
This does not include retransmissions."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
"The number of RADIUS Access Accept packets (valid or invalid) received from this server."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
"The number of RADIUS Access Reject packets (valid or invalid) received from this server."
"The number of RADIUS Access Challenge packets (valid or invalid) received from this server."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
"The number of malformed RADIUS Access Response packets received from this server.
Malformed packets include packets with an invalid length.
Bad authenticators or Signature attributes or unknown types are not included as malformed access responses."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
"The number of RADIUS Access Response packets containing invalid authenticators or Signature attributes received from this server."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
"The number of RADIUS Access Request packets destined for this server that have not yet timed out or received a response.
This variable is incremented when an Access Request is sent and decremented due to receipt of an Acess Accept, Access Reject or Access Challenge, a timeout or retransmission."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
"The number of authentication timeouts to this server.
After a timeout the client may retry to the same server, send to a different server, or give up.
A retry to the same server is counted as a retransmit as well as a timeout.
A send to a different server is counted as a Request as well as a timeout."
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
MAX ACCESS read only STATUS current DESCRIPTION
"The number of RADIUS packets of which were received from this server on the authentication port and dropped for some other reason."
radiusAuthClientMIBCompliance MODULE COMPLIANCE STATUS  current DESCRIPTION
"The compliance statement for authentication clients implementing the RADIUS Authentication Client MIB."
The basic collection of objects providing management of RADIUS Authentication Clients."
There are no management objects defined in this MIB that have a MAX  ACCESS clause of read write and/or read create.
So, if this MIB is implemented correctly, then there is no risk that an intruder can alter or create any management objects of this MIB via direct SNMP SET operations.
There are a number of managed objects in this MIB that may contain sensitive information.
radiusAuthServerAddress This can be used to determine the address of the RADIUS authentication server with which the client is communicating.
This information could be useful in mounting an attack on the authentication server.
This can be used to determine the port number on which the RADIUS authentication client is sending.
This information could be useful in impersonating the client in order to send data to the authentication server.
It is thus important to control even GET access to these objects and possibly to even encrypt the values of these object when sending them over the network via SNMP.
Not all versions of SNMP provide features for such a secure environment.
by itself is not a secure environment.
Even if the network itself is secure (for example by using IPSec), there is no control as to who on the secure network is allowed to access and
the objects in this MIB.
It is recommended that the implementers consider the security features as provided by the SNMPv3 framework.
Specifically, the use of the User based Security Model RFC 2574 [12] and the View based Access Control Model RFC 2575
Using these security features, customer/users can give access to the objects only to those principals (users) that have legitimate rights to GET or SET (change/create/delete) them.
The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in this document or the extent
to which any license under such rights might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it has made any effort to identify any such rights.
Information on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards track and standards related documentation can be found in BCP 11.
Copies of claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.
The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice this standard.
Please address the information to the IETF Executive Director.
