Abstract This document describes conventions whereby the system identifier portion of an RFC 1237 style NSAP address may be guaranteed uniqueness within a routing domain for the purpose of autoconfiguration in TUBA/CLNP internets.
The mechanism is extensible and can provide a basis for assigning system identifiers in a globally unique fashion.
This memo specifies methods for assigning a 6 octet system identifier portion of the OSI NSAP address formats described in "Guidelines for OSI NSAP Allocation in the Internet" [1], in a fashion that ensures that the ID is unique within a routing domain.
It also recommends methods for assigning system identifiers having lengths other than 6 octets.
The 6 octet system identifiers recommended in this RFC are assigned from 2 globally administered spaces (IEEE 802 or "Ethernet", and IP numbers, administered by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, IANA).
At this time, the primary purpose for assuring uniqueness of system identifiers is to aid in autoconfiguration of NSAP addresses in TUBA/CLNP internets [2].
The guidelines in this paper also establish an initial framework within which globally unique system identifiers, also called endpoint identifiers, may be assigned.
The general format of OSI network service access point (NSAP) addresses is illustrated in Figure 1.
Selector Figure 1: OSI NSAP Address Structure.
The recommended encoding and allocation of NSAP addresses in the Internet is specified in RFC 1237.
RFC 1237 makes the following statements regarding the system identifier (ID) field of the NSAPA: 1.
the ID field may be from one to eight octets in length 2.
the ID must have a single known length in any particular routing domain 3.
the ID field must be unique within an area for ESs and level 1 ISs, and unique within the routing domain for level 2 ISs.
the ID field is assumed to be flat RFC 1237 further indicates that, within a routing domain that conforms to the OSI intradomain routing protocol [3] the lower order octets of the NSAP should be structured as the ID and SEL fields shown in Figure 1 to take full advantage of intradomain IS IS routing.
(End systems with addresses which do not conform may require additional manual configuration and be subject to inferior routing performance.)
Both GOSIP Version 2 (under DFI 80h, see Figure 2a) and ANSI DCC
(Figure 2b) define a common DSP structure in which the system identifier is assumed to be a fixed length of 6 octets.
GOSIP Version 2 NSAP structure.
IDP   Initial Domain Part AFI   Authority and Format Identifier IDI   Initial Domain Identifier DSP   Domain Specific Part DFI   DSP Format Identifier ORG   Organization Name (numeric form)
Rsvd  Reserved RD    Routing Domain Identifier Area
System Identifier SEL   NSAP Selector Figure 2(b):
ANSI NSAP address format for DCC 840 2.
There are provisions in OSI for the autoconfiguration of area addresses.
OSI end systems may learn their area addresses automatically by observing area address identified in the IS Hello packets transmitted by routers using the ISO 9542 End System to Intermediate System Routing Protocol, and may then insert their own system identifier.
(In particular, RFC 1237 explains that when the ID portion of the address is assigned using IEEE style 48 bit identifiers, an end system can reconfigure its entire NSAP address automatically without the need for manual intervention.)
End systems that have not been pre configured with an NSAPA may also request an address from an intermediate system their area using [5].
2.1  Autoconfiguration and 48 bit addresses There is a general misassumption that the 6 octet system identifier must be a 48 bit IEEE assigned (ethernet) address.
Generally speaking, autoconfiguration does not rely on the use of a 48 bit ethernet style address; any system identifier that is globally administered and is unique will do.
The use of 48 bit/6 octet system identifiers is "convenient...because it is the same length as an 802 address", but more importantly, choice of a single, uniform ID length allows for "efficient packet forwarding", since routers won't have to make on the fly decisions about ID length (see [6], pages 156 157).
Still, it is not a requirement that system identifiers be 6 octets to operate the the IS IS protocol, and IS IS allows for the use of IDs with lengths from 1 to 8 octets.
System Identifiers for TUBA/CLNP Autoconfiguration is a desirable feature for TUBA/CLNP, and is viewed by some as "essential if a network is to scale to a truly large size" [6].
For this purpose, and to accommodate communities who do not wish to use ethernet style addresses, a generalized format that satisfies the following criteria is desired: the format is compatible with installed end systems complying to RFC 1237
the format accommodates 6 octet, globally unique system identifiers that do not come from the ethernet address space the format accommodates globally unique system identifiers having lengths other than 6 octets
The format and encoding of a globally unique system identifier that meets these requirements is illustrated in Figure 3:
General format of the system identifier 3.1  IEEE 802 Form of System Identifier
The format is compatible with globally assigned IEEE 802 addresses, since it carefully preserves the semantics of the global/local and group/individual bits.
Octet 1 identifies 2 qualifier bits, G and M, and a subtype (TT) field whose semantics are associated with the qualifier bits.
When a globally assigned IEEE 802 address is used as a system identifier, the qualifier bit M, representing the multicast/unicast bit, must always be set to zero to denote a unicast address.
The qualifier bit G may be either 0 or 1, depending on whether the individual address is globally or locally assigned.
In these circumstances, the subtype bits are "don't care", and the system identifier shall be interpreted as a 48 bit, globally unique identifier assigned from the IEEE 802 committee (an ethernet address).
The remaining bits in octet 1, together with octets 2 and 3 are the vendor code or OUI (organizationally unique identifier), as illustrated in Figure 4.
The ID is encoded in IEEE 802 canonical form (low order bit of low order hex digit of leftmost octet is the first bit transmitted).
802 form of system identifier 4.
Embedded IP Address as System Identifier To distinguish 48 bit IEEE
802 addresses used as system identifiers from other forms of globally admininistered system identifiers, the qualifer bit M shall be set to 1.
The correct interpretation of the M bit set to 1 should be, "this can't be an IEEE 802 multicast address, since use of multicast addresses is by convention illegal, so it must be some other form of system identifier".
The subtype (TT) bits illustrated in Figure 3 thus become relevant.
When the subtype bits (TT) are set to a value of 0, the system identifier contains an embedded IP address.
The remainder of the 48  bit system identifier is encoded as follows.
The remaining nibble in octet 1 shall be set to zero.
Octet 2 is reserved and shall be set to a pre assigned value (see Figure 5).
Octets 3 through 6 shall contain a valid IP address, assigned by IANA.
Each octet of the IP address is encoded in binary, in internet canonical form, i.e., the leftmost bit of the network number first.
Embedded IP address as system identifier
As an example, the host "eve.bellcore.com   128.96.90.55" could retain its IP address as a system identifier in a TUBA/CLNP network.
The encoded ID is illustrated in Figure 6.
reserved   IP address   Figure 6.
Example of IP address encoded as ID H 2 "Other forms of System Identifiers" To allow for the future definition of additional 6 octet system identifiers, the remaining subtype values are reserved.
It is also possible to identify system identifiers with lengths other than 6 octets.
Communities who wish to use 8 octet identifiers (for example, embedded E.164 international numbers for the ISDN ERA) must use a GOSIP/ANSI DSP format that allows for the specification of 2 additional octets in the ID field, perhaps at the expense of the "Rsvd" fields; this document recommends that a separate Domain Format Indicator value be assigned for such purposes; i.e., a DFI value that is interpreted as saying, among other things, "the system identifier encoded in this DSP is 64 bits/8 octets.
ANSI NSAP address format for DCC 840,
IDP   Initial Domain Part AFI   Authority and Format Identifier
IDI   Initial Domain Identifier DSP   Domain Specific Part DFI   DSP Format Identifier AA    Administrative Authority RD    Routing Domain Identifier Area  Area Identifier ID
System Identifier SEL   NSAP Selector Figure 7b:
GOSIP Version 2 NSAP structure, DFI bar Similar address engineering can be applied for those communities who wish to have shorter system identifiers; have another DFI assigned, and expand the reserved field.
This proposal should debunk the "if it's 48 bits, it's gotta be an ethernet address" myth.
It demonstrates how IP addresses may be encoded within the 48 bit system identifier field in a compatible fashion with IEEE 802 addresses, and offers guidelines for those who wish to use system identifiers other than those enumerated here.
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
