Abstract Entertainment Identifier Registry (EIDR)
Identifiers are used for the globally unique identification of motion picture and television content.
This document defines the formal Uniform Resource Name (URN)
Namespace Identifier (NID) for EIDR Identifiers.
This document obsoletes RFC 7302.
This document defines the formal Uniform Resource Name (URN)
Namespace Identifier (NID) for EIDR Identifiers.
EIDR Identifiers are centrally registered, globally unique identifiers for audiovisual works and their variants, primarily film and television.
A unique set of metadata parameters describing the associated work is bound to the EIDR Identifier at the time of registration.
EIDR Identifiers are a special kind of DOI Name allocated by EIDR Association specifically for audiovisual works.
The Digital Object Identifier (DOI) system provides an infrastructure for persistent unique identification of objects of any type and is specified in [ISO26234].
A DOI Name is the identifier that is permanently assigned to an object.
The use of DOI Names ensures persistence, global uniqueness, and an open resolution infrastructure.
As a DOI Name, an EIDR Identifier has two components: a prefix assigned exclusively to EIDR Association by the DOI Registration Authority and a suffix defined by EIDR Association.
Currently, EIDR Identifiers use the prefix "10.5240", but additional prefixes might be introduced in the future.
The following is an example of an EIDR Identifier in its canonical representation:
10.5240/7791 8534 2C23 9030 8610 5 where "10.5240" is the prefix and "7791 8534 2C23 9030 8610 5" is the suffix.
The canonical URN representation of the same EIDR
[EIDR OVERVIEW] and [EIDR INTRO] provide additional background information.
This document obsoletes RFC 7302.
See Appendix A for a summary of changes.
Completed URN Namespace Definition Template
The namespace definition according to the template in [RFC3406] is as follows:
Version 1 2014 03 03 Declared registrant of the namespace:
Name: Entertainment Identifier Registry Association Address:
c/o Alliances Management 544 Hillside Road Redwood City, CA 94062
An EIDR Identifier is a special kind of DOI Name (see [ISO26234]) and, as such, consists of two components: a prefix denoted EIDR  PREFIX and a suffix denoted EIDR SUFFIX.
The URN representation URN EIDR of an EIDR
Identifier conforms to the syntax (expressed using [RFC5234]):
Additional prefix values conforming to the EIDR PREFIX syntax might be introduced by EIDR Association in the future.
In all cases, each of these additional prefix values will be associated with suffix values that conform to a subset of the EIDR SUFFIX syntax.
These additional prefixes and their corresponding suffixes will be documented in future revisions to this registration.
An implementation can process an EIDR NSS with an unknown prefix as an opaque string per the "Rules of Lexical Equivalence" below, and resolve it as a generic DOI Name per the "Process for identifier resolution" below.
When EIDR PREFIX is equal to "10.5240", the syntax of EIDR SUFFIX is further constrained according to the RP2079 SUFFIX syntax specified in [SMPTERP2079]:
DIGIT / ALPHA where CHECK is the Mod 37,36 check character as specified in [ISO7064], computed over the 20 hexadecimal digits HEXDIG of RP2079 SUFFIX.
eidr:10.5240:7791 8534 2C23 9030 8610 5 Relevant ancillary documentation: [ISO26234] specifies DOI Name syntax and registration.
[SMPTERP2079] specifies the syntax of the EIDR Identifier with the prefix "10.5240".
: An EIDR Identifier is a DOI Name.
The ISO 26324 Registration Authority ensures DOI Name uniqueness; therefore, the URN EIDR derived from an EIDR Identifier is guaranteed to be unique and never reassigned.
Furthermore, an EIDR Identifier is associated with a single URN  EIDR.
Identifier persistence considerations: An EIDR Identifier is a DOI Name.
The ISO 26324 Registration Authority ensures that a DOI Name remains valid indefinitely; therefore, the URN EIDR derived from an EIDR Identifier remains valid indefinitely.
Process of identifier assignment: EIDR Association registers each EIDR Identifier with the ISO 26324 Registration Authority.
Entities involved in the motion picture and television industry, either directly in the production of content or in its distribution and related services, are eligible to apply for registrant status.
Registrants pay an annual membership fee that depends on the size of the company.
Process for identifier resolution: As a DOI Name, the resolution of the EIDR Identifier associated with an EIDR NSS is handled by the ISO 26324 Registration Authority.
2C23 9030 8610 5 NOTE:
The web service uses the HTTP Accept header to determine the format of the response.
When using a web browser to access the resource above, the query string "?
Full" is appended to the URI to explicitly request an XML response.
EIDR Association operates additional services specifically tailored to EIDR users (see [EIDR SERVICES] and [DOI EIDR PROXY]).
These services include additional features, e.g., the ability to register EIDR Identifiers and web based GUI tools.
Lexical equivalence of the URN EIDR is defined by case insensitive string match.
The URN EIDR includes the "urn:eidr:" string, as specified under "Declaration of syntactic structure".
Conformance with URN Syntax: As specified above, the syntax of the URN EIDR is a subset of the URN syntax specified in [RFC2141].
Validation mechanism: The validity of an EIDR NSS can only be guaranteed by completing the resolution process.
For EIDR NSS with an EIDR PREFIX equal to "10.5240", the CHECK value can be used for integrity checking, as specified above.
EIDR Identifiers are centrally registered, globally unique identifiers for use with audiovisual works worldwide.
Identifiers are intended for use in Internet applications, where URNs are routinely used to identify audiovisual resources.
There is no direct mapping from EIDR Identifiers to existing URN namespaces.
The primary registrants of EIDR Identifiers are producers and distributors of audiovisual works, metadata aggregators, and audiovisual archives.
Any bona fide member of the ecosystem can become an EIDR member and register any work.
EIDR Identifiers can be used by anyone to unambiguously identify an audiovisual asset and retrieve underlying metadata.
The primary benefits of their use are associated with works in wide distribution, management of long or complex distribution chains, and aggregation of information from multiple sources.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the Formal URN Namespace 'eidr' in the "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespaces" registry, using the registration template in Section 2 of this document.
This document specifies the syntax of the URN EIDR namespace and makes no security representations.
Furthermore, the details of assignment and resolution processes are defined external to this document by EIDR Association and the ISO 26324 Registration Authority, and are thus outside the scope of this document.
Note, however, that failure to conform to the syntactic and lexical equivalence rules in this specification when using an EIDR Identifier as a criteria for accessing restricted resources can result in granting unauthorized access to these resources.
Appendix A.  Summary of Changes (Informative) A.1.
This Appendix summarizes changes across revisions of this specification.
This summary is informative and not intended to be exhaustive.
Readers seeking a definitive list of changes are instead encouraged to use tools such as [rfcdiff].
Changes from RFC 7302  "Process for identifier resolution
The syntax for the URI supplied to the web service is modified to use (a) the 'https' scheme and (b) the URN EIDR representation of the EIDR Identifier.
