Abstract This document defines a sub TLV called "Link attributes" carried within the TLV 22 and used to flood some link characteristics.
[IS IS] specifies the IS IS protocol (ISO 10589) with extensions to support IPv4 in [RFC1195].
A router advertises one or several Link State Protocol data units that are composed of variable length tuples called TLVs (Type Length Value).
[RFC3784] defines a set of new TLVs whose aims are to add more information about links characteristics, increase the range of IS IS metrics, and optimize the encoding of IS IS prefixes.
This document defines a new sub TLV named "Link attributes" carried within the extended IS reachability TLV (type 22) specified in [RFC3784].
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
Link Attributes Sub TLV Format
The link attribute sub TLV is carried within the TLV 22 and has a format identical to the sub TLV format used by the Traffic Engineering Extensions for IS IS ([RFC3784]): 1 octet of sub type, 1 octet of length of the value field of the sub TLV followed by the value field   in this case, a 16 bit flags field.
The Link attribute sub type is 19 and the link attribute has a length of 2 octets.
This sub TLV is OPTIONAL and MUST appear at most once for a single IS neighbor.
If a received Link State Packet (LSP) contains more than one Link Attribute Sub TLV, an implementation SHOULD decide to consider only the first encountered instance.
The following bits are defined: Local Protection Available (0x01).
When set, this indicates that the link is protected by means of some local protection mechanism (e.g., [RFC4090]).
Link excluded from local protection path (0x02).
When set, this link SHOULD not be included in any computation of a repair path by any other router in the routing area.
The triggers for setting up this bit are out of the scope of this document.
A router not supporting the link attribute sub TLV will just silently ignore this sub TLV.
IANA Considerations IANA has assigned codepoint 19 for the link attribute sub
TLV defined in this document and carried within TLV 22.
IANA has created a registry for bit values inside the link
The initial contents of this registry are as follows Value   Name
Link Excluded from Local Protection
Further values are to be allocated by the Standards Action process defined in [RFC2434], with Early Allocation (defined in [RFC4020]) permitted.
Any new security issues raised by the procedures in this document depend upon the opportunity for LSPs to be snooped and modified, the ease/difficulty of which has not been altered.
As the LSPs may now contain additional information regarding router capabilities, this new information would also become available to an attacker.
Specifications based on this mechanism need to describe the security considerations around the disclosure and modification of their information.
Note that an integrity mechanism, such as one defined in [RFC3567], should be applied if there is high risk resulting from the modification of capability information.
