Introduction Router Requirements [1] specifies that routers must receive and forward directed broadcasts.
It also specifies that routers MUST have an option to disable this feature, and that this option MUST default to permit the receiving and forwarding of directed broadcasts.
While directed broadcasts have uses, their use on the Internet backbone appears to be comprised entirely of malicious attacks on other networks.
Changing the required default for routers would help ensure new routers connected to the Internet do not add to the problems already present.
Discussion Damaging denial of service attacks led to the writing of [2] on Ingress Filtering.
Many network providers and corporate networks have endorsed the use of these methods to ensure their networks are not the source of such attacks.
A recent trend in Smurf Attacks [3] is to target networks which permit directed broadcasts from outside their networks.
By permitting directed broadcasts, these systems become "Smurf Amplifiers."
While the continued implementation of ingress filters remains the best way to limit these attacks, restricting directed broadcasts should also receive priority.
Network service providers and corporate network operators are urged to ensure their networks are not susceptible to directed broadcast packets originating outside their networks.
Mobile IP [4] had provisions for using directed broadcasts in a mobile node's use of  dynamic agent discovery.
While some implementations support this feature, it is unclear whether it is useful.
Other methods of achieving the same result are documented in [5].
It may be worthwhile to consider removing the language on using directed broadcasts as Mobile IP progresses on the standards track.
Recommendation Router Requirements [1] is updated as follows:
It MUST NOT be used as a source address.
A router MAY originate Network Directed Broadcast packets.
A router MAY have a configuration option to allow it to receive directed broadcast packets, however this option MUST be disabled by default, and thus the router MUST NOT receive Network Directed Broadcast packets unless specifically configured by the end user.
Section 5.3.5.2, second paragraph replaced with: A router MAY have an option to enable receiving network prefix  directed broadcasts on an interface and MAY have an option to enable forwarding network prefix directed broadcasts.
These options MUST default to blocking receipt and blocking forwarding of network prefix directed broadcasts.
The goal of this document is to reduce the efficacy of certain types of denial of service attacks.
