Abstract This document reorganizes the IANA registries for the type values and sub type values of the BGP Extended Communities attribute and the BGP IPv6 Address Specific Extended Communities attribute.
This is done in order to remove interdependencies among the registries, thus making it easier for IANA to determine which codepoints are available for assignment in which registries.
This document also clarifies the information that must be provided to IANA when requesting an allocation from one or more of these registries.
These changes are compatible with the existing allocations and thus do not affect protocol implementations.
The changes will, however, impact the "IANA Considerations" sections of future protocol specifications.
This document updates RFC 4360 and RFC 5701.
[RFC4360] defines the BGP "Extended Communities" (EC) attribute.
This attribute consists of a sequence of eight octet "extended communities".
The high order octet is defined to be the "Type" field.
Each Type has a range of values for "Transitive Extended Community Types" and a range of values for "Non transitive Extended Community Types".
Some of these ranges are further subdivided into a sub range of values to be assigned by IANA under the "Standards Action" policy, a sub range of values to be assigned by IANA under the "First Come First Served" policy, and a sub range for "experimental use".
(See [RFC5226], [RFC7120], and [RFC3692] for an explanation of these policies.)
For some Extended Community Types, the second octet of the Extended Community is a "Sub Type" field, and the remaining six octets are the "Value" field.
These are referred to as "Extended Types".
For other types, there is no "Sub Type" field, and the "Value" field contains seven octets.
These are referred to as "Regular Types".
RFC 4360 is not very specific about how the IANA registries for Extended Community Types and/or Sub Types are to be organized, and this has led to some confusion.
The purpose of this document is to reorganize the registries to make the IANA codepoint allocation task more straightforward.
Types, Sub Types, and Registries
The high order octet of an Extended Community will be known as the "Type" field.
There will be one IANA registry for "Transitive Extended Community Types" (see Section 5.1.1) and one for "Non transitive Extended Community Types" (Section 5.1.2).
Each registry specifies three ranges, and each range is associated with a particular IANA allocation policy.
There will be a set of IANA registries for Extended Community Sub Types (see Section 5.2).
Each such registry will have a range of 0x00 0xFF.
Values in the range 0x00
0xBF are assignable by IANA according to the "First Come First Served" allocation policy of [RFC5226].
Values in the range 0xC0
0xFF are assignable by IANA according to the "IETF Review" allocation policy of [RFC5226].
If a particular Type has Sub Types, that Type's entry in its Type registry identifies its Sub Type registry.
Note that some Types do not have Sub Types.
When the request is made to establish a new Type registry, the request must specify whether or not there is to be a Sub Type registry associated with that Type.
Whether a given Type has Sub Types is determined when the Type is initially defined; this cannot be changed later.
Applicability to IPv6 Address Specific EC Attribute RFC 5701
[RFC5701] defines the IPv6 Address Specific Extended Community to be a 20 octet quantity whose high order two octets may be considered to be the "Type" field.
The high order octet is either 0x00, indicating a transitive Extended Community; or 0x40, indicating a Non transitive Extended Community.
The second octet is said to be a "Sub Type", and it is suggested that the Sub Types are the same as the Sub Types for the IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community.
However, the existing IANA codepoint allocations for this octet do not always match the corresponding allocations for the IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community Sub Types.
This document modifies RFC 5701 by removing any requirement for the values of the second octet of the IPv6 Address Specific Extended Community Type codepoints to match the codepoints in either of the IPv4 Address Specific Sub Types registries.
This document requests IANA to create two IPv6 Address Specific Extended Community registries   one for transitive communities and one for non transitive communities.
How to Request EC Type and/or Sub Type Codepoints
When a codepoint is needed for a new Extended Community, the requester should first determine whether an existing Type can be used.
If so, IANA should be asked to allocate a codepoint from the corresponding Sub Type registry, if there is one.
If a new Extended Community Type is needed, the requester should ask IANA to allocate a new type from the "BGP Transitive Extended Community Types" registry, the "BGP Non Transitive Extended Community Types" registry, or both.
It is up to the requester to state whether an allocation is needed from one or both of these registries.
When an allocation from both registries is requested, the requester may find it desirable for both allocations to share the same low order six bits.
If so, it is the responsibility of the requester to explicitly request this of IANA.
Of course, any request for a codepoint from a particular registry must follow the defined registration procedures for that registry.
If a new Extended Community Type is needed and the new Type is to have Sub Types, the requester should specify whether an existing Sub Type registry can be used for the new Type or a new Sub Type registry is needed.
(At the current time, every Type that has Sub Types is associated with a unique Sub Type registry.
It is possible that in the future a new Type registry may be created that is associated with a pre existing Sub Type registry.)
In either case, if a new Sub Type value needs to be allocated from a particular Sub Type registry, the request should explicitly identify the registry.
If the creation of a new Sub Type registry is requested, the range of values is always 0x00 0xFF.
It is recommended that the allocation policy described in Section 2 be used, i.e., 0x00 0xBF to be allocated by IANA under the "First Come First Served" policy and 0xC0 0xFF to be allocated by IANA under the "IETF Review" policy.
Commonly, a new Extended Community is defined such that it can be of several Types.
For example, one may want to define a new Extended Community so that it can be either transitive or non transitive, either the two octet AS Number Type or the four octet AS Number Type, etc.
The requester is responsible for explicitly asking IANA to allocate codepoints in all the necessary Type and/or Sub Type registries.
When a new Extended Community is defined, it may be necessary to ask IANA to allocate codepoints in several Sub Type registries.
In this case, it is a common practice to ask IANA to allocate the same codepoint value in each registry.
If this is desired, it is the responsibility of the requester to explicitly ask IANA to allocate the same value in each registry.
When a new Extended Community Sub Type codepoint is allocated, it may also be desirable to allocate a corresponding value in one or both of the IPv6 Address Specific Extended Community registries.
The requester is responsible for requesting this allocation explicitly.
If the requester would like the same numerical value to be allocated in an IPv6 Address Specific Extended Community registry that is allocated in some other registry, it is the responsibility of the requester to explicitly ask this of IANA.
IANA Considerations IANA has replaced the pre existing BGP Extended Communities registries with the registries described in this section.
The registries reproduced below do not include the "references" or "date" fields for the individual codepoints in the registries, because it is difficult to incorporate those within the 72 character line limitation of RFCs.
The references and associated dates have been copied from the existing registries when creating the new registries; the authors have worked with IANA to ensure that this information has been carried over correctly to the reorganized registry.
As this document does not change the usage or semantics of any of the codepoints, the references associated with the individual codepoints do not change.
On the other hand, the references for each of the registries defined in this section have been changed to refer to this document.
Registries for the "Type" Field 5.1.1.
The following note has been added to the "BGP Transitive Extended Community Types" registry.
This registry contains values of the high order octet (the "Type" field) of a Transitive Extended Community.
BGP Transitive Extended Community Types RANGE
Experimental Use (see RFC 3692)
Two Octet AS Specific Extended Community
(Sub Types are defined in the "Transitive Two Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry)
Transitive IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community (Sub Types are defined in the "Transitive IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry)
Transitive Four Octet AS Specific Extended Community (Sub Types are defined in the "Transitive Four Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry)
Transitive Opaque Extended Community (Sub Types are defined in the "Transitive Opaque Extended Community Sub Types" registry)
The following note has been added to the "BGP Non Transitive Extended Community Types" registry.
This registry contains values of the high order octet (the "Type" field) of a Non transitive Extended Community.
Two Octet AS Specific Extended Community
(Sub Types are defined in the "Non Transitive Two Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry)
Address Specific Extended Community (Sub Types are defined in the "Non Transitive IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry
Non Transitive Four Octet AS Specific Extended Community
(Sub Types are defined in the "Non Transitive Four Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry)
Non Transitive Opaque Extended Community (Sub Types are defined in the "Non Transitive Opaque Extended Community Sub Types" registry)
Registries for the "Sub Type" Field 5.2.1.
EVPN Extended Community Sub Types
The following note has been added to the "EVPN Extended Community Sub Types" registry: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x06.
IETF Review SUB TYPE VALUE
Transitive Two Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types
The following note has been added to the "Transitive Two Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x00.
Transitive Two Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types RANGE
IETF Review SUB TYPE VALUE
Non Transitive Two Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types
The following note has been added to the "Non Transitive Two Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x40.
Non Transitive Two Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types RANGE
IETF Review SUB TYPE VALUE
Link Bandwidth Extended Community 5.2.4.
Transitive Four Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types
The following note has been added to the "Transitive Four Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x02.
Transitive Four Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types RANGE
IETF Review SUB TYPE VALUE
Four Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types
The following note has been added to the "Non Transitive Four Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x42.
Non Transitive Four Octet AS Specific Extended Community Sub Types RANGE
IETF Review SUB TYPE VALUE
Transitive IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community Sub Types
The following note has been added to the "Transitive IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x01.
Address Specific Extended Community Sub Types RANGE
IETF Review SUB TYPE VALUE
Non Transitive IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community Sub Types
The following note has been added to the "Non Transitive IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community Sub Types" registry: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x41.
Address Specific Extended Community Sub Types RANGE
Transitive Opaque Extended Community Sub Types
The following note has been added to the "Transitive Opaque Extended Community Sub Types" registry: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x03.
Non Transitive Opaque Extended Community Sub Types
The following note has been added to the "Non Transitive Opaque Extended Community Sub Types" registry: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x43.
Extended Community Sub Types RANGE
IETF Review SUB TYPE VALUE
Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Sub Types
The following note has been added to the "Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Sub Types" registry: This registry contains values of the second octet (the "Sub Type" field) of an extended community when the value of the first octet (the "Type" field) is 0x80.
Generic Transitive Experimental Use Extended Community Sub Types RANGE
IETF Review SUB TYPE VALUE
Layer2 Info Extended Community Note
: RFC 5575 contains narrative text that declares the "Flow spec traffic rate" to be non transitive
but then assigns it a codepoint that indicates that it is transitive.
Addressing this error in RFC 5575 is not within the scope of this document.
Registries for the "Value" Field
At the time of the writing of this document, there is only one registry containing codepoints for the "Value" field of an Extended Community.
This registry has not been modified.
Registries for IPv6 Address Specific ECs
The following note has been added to the "Transitive IPv6 Address Specific Extended Community Types" registry: This registry contains values of the two high order octets of an IPv6 Address Specific Extended Community.
Transitive IPv6 Address Specific Extended Community Types RANGE
The following note has been added to the "Non Transitive IPv6 Address Specific Extended Community Types" registry: This registry contains values of the two high order octets of an IPv6 Address Specific Extended Community.
Specific Extended Community Types RANGE
No security considerations are raised by this document.
