Abstract This document provides procedures for registering extensible elements of the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP).
The document also provides guidelines to the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) describing conditions under which new values can be assigned.
The Lightweight Directory Access Protocol [RFC4510] (LDAP) is an extensible protocol.
the addition of new operations,  the extension of existing operations, and  the extensible schema.
This document details procedures for registering values used to unambiguously identify extensible elements of the protocol, including the following:
LDAP extended operations and controls LDAP result codes LDAP authentication methods LDAP attribute description options
These registries are maintained by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA).
In addition, this document provides guidelines to IANA describing the conditions under which new values can be assigned.
This document replaces RFC 3383.
This section details terms and conventions used in this document.
The terms "IESG Approval", "Standards Action", "IETF Consensus", "Specification Required", "First Come First Served", "Expert Review", and "Private Use" are used as defined in BCP 26 [RFC2434].
The term "registration owner" (or "owner") refers to the party authorized to change a value's registration.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
In this case, "the specification", as used by BCP 14, refers to the processing of protocols being submitted to the IETF standards process.
A number of syntaxes in this document are described using ABNF [RFC4234].
These syntaxes rely on the following common productions:
This section details each kind of protocol value that can be registered and provides IANA guidelines on how to assign new values.
IANA may reject obviously bogus registrations.
LDAP values specified in RFCs MUST be registered.
Other LDAP values, except those in private use name spaces, SHOULD be registered.
RFCs SHOULD NOT reference, use, or otherwise recognize unregistered LDAP values.
Numerous LDAP schema and protocol elements are identified by Object Identifiers (OIDs) [X.680].
Specifications that assign OIDs to elements
SHOULD state who delegated the OIDs for their use.
For IETF developed elements, specifications SHOULD use OIDs under "Internet Directory Numbers" (1.3.6.1.1.x).
For elements developed by others, any properly delegated OID can be used, including those under "Internet Directory Numbers" (1.3.6.1.1.x) or "Internet Private Enterprise Numbers" (1.3.6.1.4.1.x).
Internet Directory Numbers (1.3.6.1.1.x) will be assigned upon Expert Review with Specification Required.
Only one OID per specification will be assigned.
The specification MAY then assign any number of OIDs within this arc without further coordination with IANA.
Internet Private Enterprise Numbers (1.3.6.1.4.1.x) are assigned by IANA <http://www.iana.org/cgi bin/enterprise.pl
Practices for IANA assignment of Internet Private Enterprise Numbers are detailed in RFC 2578 [RFC2578].
To avoid interoperability problems between early implementations of a "work in progress" and implementations of the published specification (e.g., the RFC), experimental OIDs SHOULD be used in "works in progress" and early implementations.
OIDs under the Internet Experimental OID arc (1.3.6.1.3.x) may be used for this purpose.
Practices for IANA assignment of these Internet Experimental numbers are detailed in RFC 2578 [RFC2578].
Protocol Mechanisms LDAP provides a number of Root DSA Specific Entry (DSE) attributes for discovery of protocol mechanisms identified by OIDs, including the supportedControl, supportedExtension, and supportedFeatures
A registry of OIDs used for discovery of protocol mechanisms is provided to allow implementors and others to locate the technical specification for these protocol mechanisms.
Future specifications of additional Root DSE attributes holding values identifying protocol mechanisms MAY extend this registry for their values.
Protocol mechanisms are registered on a First Come First Served basis.
This registry provides a listing of LDAP syntaxes [RFC4512].
Each LDAP syntax is identified by an OID.
This registry is provided to allow implementors and others to locate the technical specification describing a particular LDAP Syntax.
LDAP Syntaxes are registered on a First Come First Served with Specification Required basis.
Unlike object classes, attribute types, and various other kinds of schema elements, descriptors are not used in LDAP to identify LDAP Syntaxes.
Object Identifier Descriptors LDAP allows short descriptive names (or descriptors) to be used instead of a numeric Object Identifier to identify select protocol extensions [RFC4511], schema elements [RFC4512], LDAP URL [RFC4516] extensions, and other objects.
Although the protocol allows the same descriptor to refer to different object identifiers in certain cases and the registry supports multiple registrations of the same descriptor (each indicating a different kind of schema element and different object identifier), multiple registrations of the same descriptor are to be avoided.
All such multiple registration requests require Expert Review.
Descriptors are restricted to strings of UTF 8 [RFC3629] encoded Unicode characters restricted by the following ABNF
: name   keystring Descriptors are case insensitive.
Multiple names may be assigned to a given OID.
For purposes of registration, an OID is to be represented in numeric OID form (e.g., 1.1.0.23.40) conforming to the following ABNF:
number 1 ( DOT number )
While the protocol places no maximum length restriction upon descriptors, they should be short.
Descriptors longer than 48 characters may be viewed as too long to register.
For example, the registration of the option "descrFamily " reserves all options that start with "descrFamily " for some related purpose.
Descriptors beginning with "x " are for Private Use and cannot be registered.
Descriptors beginning with "e " are reserved for experiments and will be registered on a First Come First Served basis.
All other descriptors require Expert Review to be registered.
The registrant need not "own" the OID being named.
The OID name space is managed by the ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee 1 Subcommittee 6.
An AttributeDescription [RFC4512] can contain zero or more options specifying additional semantics.
An option SHALL be restricted to a string of UTF 8 encoded Unicode characters limited by the following ABNF: option
keystring Options are case insensitive.
While the protocol places no maximum length restriction upon option strings, they should be short.
Options longer than 24 characters may be viewed as too long to register.
For example, the registration of the option "optionFamily " reserves all options that start with "optionFamily " for some related purpose.
Options beginning with "x " are for Private Use and cannot be registered.
Options beginning with "e " are reserved for experiments and will be registered on a First Come First Served basis.
All other options require Standards Action or Expert Review with Specification Required to be registered.
Each protocol message is encapsulated in an LDAPMessage envelope [RFC4511.
The protocolOp CHOICE indicates the type of message encapsulated.
Each message type consists of an ASN.1 identifier in the form of a keyword and a non negative choice number.
The choice number is combined with the class (APPLICATION) and data type (CONSTRUCTED or PRIMITIVE) to construct the BER tag in the message's encoding.
The choice numbers for existing protocol messages are implicit in the protocol's ASN.1 defined in [RFC4511].
New values will be registered upon Standards Action.
Note: LDAP provides extensible messages that reduce but do not eliminate the need to add new message types.
The LDAP Bind operation supports multiple authentication methods [RFC4511].
Each authentication choice consists of an ASN.1 identifier in the form of a keyword and a non negative integer.
LIMITED USE method is appropriate for limited use.
OBSOLETE    method has been deprecated or otherwise found to be inappropriate for any use.
Methods without publicly available specifications SHALL NOT be classified as COMMON.
New registrations of the class OBSOLETE cannot be registered.
New authentication method integers in the range 0 1023 require Standards Action to be registered.
New authentication method integers in the range 1024 4095 require Expert Review with Specification Required.
New authentication method integers in the range
4096 16383 will be registered on a First Come First Served basis.
Keywords associated with integers in the range 0 4095 SHALL NOT start with "e " or "x ".
Keywords associated with integers in the range 4096 16383
SHALL start with "e ".
Values greater than or equal to 16384 and keywords starting with "x " are for Private Use and cannot be registered.
LDAP supports Simple Authentication and Security Layers
[RFC4422] as an authentication choice.
SASL is an extensible authentication framework.
LDAP Result Codes LDAP result messages carry a resultCode enumerated value to indicate the outcome of the operation [RFC4511].
Each result code consists of an ASN.1 identifier in the form of a keyword and a non negative integer.
New resultCodes integers in the range 0 1023 require Standards Action to be registered.
New resultCode integers in the range 1024 4095 require Expert Review with Specification Required.
New resultCode integers in the range 4096 16383 will be registered on a First Come First Served basis.
Keywords associated with integers in the range 0 4095 SHALL NOT start with "e " or "x ".
Keywords associated with integers in the range 4096 16383
SHALL start with "e ".
Values greater than or equal to 16384 and keywords starting with "x " are for Private Use and cannot be registered.
LDAP Search Scope LDAP SearchRequest messages carry a scope enumerated value to indicate the extent of search within the DIT [RFC4511].
Each search value consists of an ASN.1 identifier in the form of a keyword and a non negative integer.
New scope integers in the range 0 1023 require Standards Action to be registered.
New scope integers in the range 1024 4095 require Expert Review with Specification Required.
New scope integers in the range 4096 16383 will be registered on a First Come First Served basis.
Keywords associated with integers in the range 0 4095 SHALL NOT start with "e " or "x ".
Keywords associated with integers in the range 4096 16383
SHALL start with "e ".
Values greater than or equal to 16384 and keywords starting with "x " are for Private Use and cannot be registered.
LDAP Filter Choice LDAP filters are used in making assertions against an object represented in the directory [RFC4511].
The Filter CHOICE indicates a type of assertion.
Each Filter CHOICE consists of an ASN.1 identifier in the form of a keyword and a non negative choice number.
The choice number is combined with the class (APPLICATION) and data type (CONSTRUCTED or PRIMITIVE) to construct the BER tag in the message's encoding.
LDAP provides the extensibleMatching choice, which reduces but does not eliminate the need to add new filter choices.
The LDAP ModifyRequest carries a sequence of modification operations [RFC4511].
Each kind (e.g., add, delete, replace) of operation consists of an ASN.1 identifier in the form of a keyword and a non  negative integer.
New operation type integers in the range 0 1023 require Standards Action to be registered.
New operation type integers in the range 1024 4095 require Expert Review with Specification Required.
New operation type integers in the range
4096 16383 will be registered on a First Come First Served basis.
Keywords associated with integers in the range 0 4095 SHALL NOT start with "e " or "x ".
Keywords associated with integers in the range 4096 16383
SHALL start with "e ".
Values greater than or equal to 16384 and keywords starting with "x " are for Private Use and cannot be registered.
LDAP authzId Prefixes Authorization Identities in LDAP are strings conforming to the <authzId> production [RFC4513].
Each new specific authorization form is identified by a prefix string conforming to the following ABNF:
keystring COLON COLON   %x3A ; COLON (":
While the protocol places no maximum length restriction upon prefix strings, they should be short.
Prefixes longer than 12 characters may be viewed as too long to register.
Prefixes beginning with "x " are for Private Use and cannot be registered.
Prefixes beginning with "e " are reserved for experiments and will be registered on a First Come First Served basis.
All other prefixes require Standards Action or Expert Review with Specification Required to be registered.
The IANA maintained "Directory Systems Names" registry [IANADSN] of valid keywords for well known attributes was used in the LDAPv2 string representation of a distinguished name [RFC1779].
Directory systems names are not known to be used in any other context.
[RFC4514] uses Object Identifier Descriptors [Section 3.2] (which have a different syntax than directory system names).
New Directory System Names will no longer be accepted.
For historical purposes, the current list of registered names should remain publicly available.
The procedure given here MUST be used by anyone who wishes to use a new value of a type described in Section 3 of this document.
The first step is for the requester to fill out the appropriate form.
Templates are provided in Appendix A.
If the policy is Standards Action, the completed form SHOULD be provided to the IESG with the request for Standards Action.
Upon approval of the Standards Action, the IESG SHALL forward the request (possibly revised) to IANA.
The IESG SHALL be regarded as the registration owner of all values requiring Standards Action.
If the policy is Expert Review, the requester SHALL post the completed form to the <directory@apps.ietf.org> mailing list for public review.
The review period is two (2) weeks.
If a revised form is later submitted, the review period is restarted.
Anyone may subscribe to this list by sending a request to <directory  request@apps.ietf.org
During the review, objections may be raised by anyone (including the Expert) on the list.
After completion of the review, the Expert, based on public comments, SHALL either approve the request and forward it to the IANA OR deny the request.
In either case, the Expert SHALL promptly notify the requester of the action.
Actions of the Expert may be appealed [RFC2026].
The Expert is appointed by Applications Area Directors.
The requester is viewed as the registration owner of values registered under Expert Review.
If the policy is First Come First Served, the requester SHALL submit the completed form directly to the IANA:
The requester is viewed as the registration owner of values registered under First Come First Served.
Neither the Expert nor IANA will take position on the claims of copyright or trademark issues regarding completed forms.
Prior to submission of the Internet Draft (I D) to the RFC Editor but after IESG review and tentative approval, the document editor SHOULD revise the I D to use registered values.
This section discusses maintenance of registrations.
IANA makes lists of registered values readily available to the Internet community on its web site:
The registration owner MAY update the registration subject to the same constraints and review as with new registrations.
In cases where the registration owner is unable or is unwilling to make necessary updates, the IESG MAY assume ownership of the registration in order to update the registration.
Comments For cases where others (anyone other than the registration owner) have significant objections to the claims in a registration and the registration owner does not agree to change the registration, comments MAY be attached to a registration upon Expert Review.
For registrations owned by the IESG, the objections SHOULD be addressed by initiating a request for Expert Review.
The form of these requests is ad hoc, but MUST include the specific objections to be reviewed and SHOULD contain (directly or by reference) materials supporting the objections.
The security considerations detailed in BCP 26 [RFC2434] are generally applicable to this document.
Additional security considerations specific to each name space are discussed in Section 3, where appropriate.
Security considerations for LDAP are discussed in documents comprising the technical specification [RFC4510].
This appendix provides registration templates for registering new LDAP values.
Note that more than one value may be requested by extending the template by listing multiple values, or through use of tables.
LDAP Object Identifier Registration Template Subject:
Request for LDAP OID Registration Person & email address to contact for further information: Specification: (I D)
Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
LDAP Protocol Mechanism Registration Template Subject: Request for LDAP Protocol Mechanism Registration Object Identifier:
Description: Person & email address to contact for further information: Usage: (One of Control or Extension or Feature or other
) Specification: (RFC, I D, URI)
Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
LDAP Syntax Registration Template Subject: Request for LDAP Syntax Registration Object Identifier:
Description: Person & email address to contact for further information: Specification: (RFC, I D, URI)
Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
LDAP Descriptor Registration Template Subject:
Request for LDAP Descriptor Registration Descriptor (short name):
Object Identifier: Person & email address to contact for further information: Usage: (One of administrative role, attribute type, matching rule, name form, object class, URL extension, or other) Specification: (RFC, I D, URI)
Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
LDAP Attribute Description Option Registration Template Subject:
Request for LDAP Attribute Description Option Registration Option Name: Family of Options: (YES or NO
) Person & email address to contact for further information: Specification: (RFC, I D, URI)
Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
LDAP Message Type Registration Template Subject: Request for LDAP Message Type Registration LDAP Message Name: Person & email address to contact for further information
: Specification: (Approved I D) Comments: (Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
LDAP Authentication Method Registration Template Subject: Request for LDAP Authentication Method Registration Authentication Method Name: Person & email address to contact for further information
: Specification: (RFC, I D, URI)
Intended Usage: (One of COMMON, LIMITED USE, OBSOLETE)
Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
LDAP Result Code Registration Template Subject: Request for LDAP Result Code Registration Result Code Name: Person & email address to contact for further information
: Specification: (RFC, I D, URI)
Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
LDAP Search Scope Registration Template Subject: Request for LDAP Search Scope
Filter Scope String: Person & email address to contact for further information
: Specification: (RFC, I D, URI)
Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
LDAP Filter Choice Registration Template Subject:
Request for LDAP Filter Choice Registration Filter Choice Name: Person & email address to contact for further information: Specification: (RFC, I D, URI)
Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
LDAP ModifyRequest Operation Registration Template Subject:
Request for LDAP ModifyRequest Operation Registration ModifyRequest Operation Name: Person & email address to contact for further information: Specification: (RFC, I D, URI)
Any comments that the requester deems relevant to the request.)
Appendix B.  Changes since RFC 3383
This informative appendix provides a summary of changes made since RFC 3383.
Object Identifier Descriptors practices were updated to require all descriptors defined in RFCs to be registered and recommending all other descriptors (excepting those in private use name space) be registered.
Additionally, all requests for multiple registrations of the same descriptor are now subject to Expert Review.
Protocol Mechanisms practices were updated to include values of the 'supportedFeatures' attribute type.
LDAP Syntax, Search Scope, Filter Choice, ModifyRequest operation, and authzId prefixes registries were added.
References to RFCs comprising the LDAP technical specifications have been updated to latest revisions.
References to ISO 10646 have been replaced with [Unicode].
The "Assigned Values" appendix providing initial registry values was removed.
Numerous editorial changes were made.
