Abstract This memo defines a portion of the Management Information Base (MIB) for use with network management protocols in TCP/IP based internets.
In particular, it defines objects for managing the the interface attributes defined in the Integrated Services Model.
Comments should be made to the Integrated Services Working Group, int serv@isi.edu. 1
The SNMPv2 Network Management Framework
Network Management Framework consists of four major components.
STD 17, RFC 1213 defines MIB II, the core set of managed objects for the Internet suite of protocols.
RFC 1445 which defines the administrative and other architectural aspects of the framework.
RFC 1448 which defines the protocol used for network access to managed objects.
The Framework permits new objects to be defined for the purpose of experimentation and evaluation.
Object Definitions Managed objects are accessed via a virtual information store, termed the Management Information Base or MIB.
Objects in the MIB are defined using the subset of Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) defined in the SMI.
In particular, each object type is named by an OBJECT IDENTIFIER, an administratively assigned name.
The object type together with an object instance serves to uniquely identify a specific instantiation of the object.
For human convenience, we often use a textual string, termed the descriptor, to refer to the object type.
Several new data types are introduced as a textual convention in this MIB document.
These textual conventions enhance the readability of the specification and can ease comparison with other specifications if appropriate.
It should be noted that the introduction of the these textual conventions has no effect on either the syntax nor the semantics of any managed objects.
The use of these is merely an artifact of the explanatory method used.
Objects defined in terms of one of these methods are always encoded by means of the rules that define the primitive type.
Hence, no changes to the SMI or the SNMP are necessary to accommodate these textual conventions which are adopted merely for the convenience of readers and writers in pursuit of the elusive goal of clear, concise, and unambiguous MIB documents.
The MIB is composed of the following sections: Integrated Services Interface Attributes Table Interface Flow Table 3.
IMPORTS MODULE IDENTITY, OBJECT TYPE, Counter32, Gauge32,
intSrv MODULE IDENTITY LAST UPDATED "9511030500Z"
PDT 1997 ORGANIZATION "IETF Integrated Services Working Group" CONTACT INFO "
Cisco Systems 519 Lado Drive Santa Barbara, California 93111
ArrowPoint Communications 235 Littleton Road Westford, Massachusetts 01886
The Session  Number  convention  is  used  for numbers  identifying  sessions or saved PATH or RESV information.
It is a number in  the  range returned  by  a TestAndIncr variable, having no protocol meaning whatsoever but serving instead as simple identifier.
The alternative was a very complex instance  or instance object that became unwieldy."
DISPLAY HINT "d" STATUS   current DESCRIPTION
"The value of the IP Protocol field  of  an  IP Datagram  Header.
This identifies the protocol layer above IP.
For example, the  value  6  is used  for TCP and the value 17 is used for UDP.
The values of this field are defined in the As  signed Numbers RFC."
"The value of the C Type field of a Session ob  ject,  as  defined  in  the RSVP specification.
This value  determines  the  lengths  of  octet strings  and use of certain objects such as the 'port' variables.
If the C Type  calls  for  an IP6  address, one would expect all source, des  tination, and next/previous hop addresses to be 16  bytes long, and for the ports to be UDP/TCP port numbers, for example."
DISPLAY HINT "d" STATUS   current DESCRIPTION
"The value of the UDP or TCP Source or Destina  tion  Port field, a virtual destination port or generalized port identifier used with the IPSEC Authentication Header or Encapsulating Security Payload, or other session discriminator.
not  used, the value should be of length 0.
This pair, when coupled with the  IP  Addresses of the source and destination system and the IP protocol  field,  uniquely  identifies  a  data stream."
DISPLAY HINT "d" STATUS   current DESCRIPTION "
The size of a message in bytes.
This  is  used to  specify
the  minimum and maximum size of a message along an integrated services route.
DISPLAY HINT "d" STATUS   current DESCRIPTION "
The rate, in bits/second, that data  may  move in  the context.
Applicable contexts minimally include the speed of an  interface  or  virtual circuit, the data rate of a (potentially aggre  gated) data flow, or the data rate to be
allo  cated for use by a flow."
DISPLAY HINT "d" STATUS   current DESCRIPTION
"The number of octets of IP Data, including  IP Headers, that a stream may send without concern for policing."
"The class of service in use by a flow."
The reservable attributes of the system's  in  terfaces."
"The number of bits/second currently  allocated to reserved sessions on the interface."
"The maximum number of bits/second that may  be allocated  to  reserved  sessions on the inter  face."
"The amount of buffer space  required  to  hold the simultaneous burst of all reserved flows on the interface."
"The number of reserved flows currently  active on  this  interface.
A flow can be created ei  ther from a reservation protocol (such as  RSVP or ST II) or via configuration information."
"The amount of propagation delay that this  in  terface  introduces  in addition to that intro  diced by bit propagation delays.
current DESCRIPTION "Information describing the reserved flows
current DESCRIPTION "Information describing the use of a given  in  terface   by
the  in  stallation of the flow.
The number of this flow.
In  dexing purposes only and has no relation to any protocol value."
"The type of session (IP4, IP6, IP6  with  flow information, etc).
"The process that installed this  flow  in  the queue policy database."
"The destination address used by all senders in this  session.
This object may not be changed when the value of the RowStatus object is  'ac  tive'."
"The source address of the sender  selected  by this  reservation.
The value of all zeroes in  dicates 'all senders'.
This object may not  be changed  when the value of the RowStatus object is 'active'."
"The length of the destination address in bits.
This  is  the CIDR Prefix Length, which for IP4 hosts and multicast addresses is 32 bits.
This object may not be changed when the value of the RowStatus object is 'active'."
"The length of the sender's  address  in  bits.
This  is  the CIDR Prefix Length, which for IP4 hosts and multicast addresses is 32 bits.
This object may not be changed when the value of the RowStatus object is 'active'."
{ intSrvFlowEntry 7 } intSrvFlowProtocol OBJECT
"The IP Protocol used by a session.
This  ob  ject  may  not be changed when the value of the RowStatus object is 'active'."
If the  IP   protocol   in   use,   specified   by intSrvResvFwdProtocol,  is 50 (ESP) or 51 (AH), this  represents  a  virtual  destination  port number.
A value of zero indicates that the IP protocol in use does not have ports.
may  not be changed when the value of the RowStatus object is 'active'."
{ intSrvFlowEntry 9 } intSrvFlowPort OBJECT TYPE SYNTAX
The UDP or TCP port number used  as  a  source port  for  this sender in this session.
is  50 (ESP) or 51 (AH)
, this represents a generalized  port  identifier (GPI).
A  value of zero indicates that the IP protocol in use does not have ports.
may  not be changed when the value of the RowStatus object is 'active'."
this  sender  is  using,  if this  is  an IPv6 session."
The IP Address on the ifEntry  on  which
This is present primarily to support those interfaces which layer  multi
ple IP Addresses on the interface."
The Reserved Rate of the sender's data stream.
If this is a Controlled Load service flow, this rate is derived from the Tspec  rate  parameter (r).
If  this  is  a Guaranteed service flow, this rate is derived from  the  Rspec  clearing rate parameter (R)."
"The size of the largest  burst  expected  from the sender at a time.
If this is less than  the  sender's  advertised burst  size, the receiver is asking the network to provide flow pacing  beyond  what  would  be provided  under normal circumstances.
Such pac  ing is at the network's option."
Note  that the interpretation of this object is implementation specific,   as   implementations vary in their use of weighting procedures."
"The number of the queue used by this  traffic.
Note  that the interpretation of this object is implementation specific,   as   implementations vary in their use of queue identifiers."
"The minimum message size for  this  flow.
The policing  algorithm will treat smaller messages as though they are this size."
"The maximum datagram size for this  flow  that will conform to the traffic specification.
This value cannot exceed the MTU of the interface."
"The number of packets that  were  remanded  to best effort service."
"The number of packets policed since the incep  tion of the flow's service.
If 'false', policed traff  ic is treated as best effort traffic."
traffic is, by default, treated as best   effort ::
{ intSrvFlowEntry 22 } intSrvFlowService OBJECT
"The QoS service being applied to this flow."
In the event of ambiguity, the order in  which the  classifier  should  make  its comparisons.
The row with intSrvFlowOrder 0 is tried  first, and  comparisons  proceed  in  the order of in  creasing value.
Non serial implementations  of the classifier should emulate this behavior."
This  object may be used to install static classifier infor  mation, delete classifier information,  or  au  thorize such."
"This  object  is  used  to  assign
values  to intSrvFlowNumber  as described in 'Textual Con  ventions  for  SNMPv2'.
the  object,  and  then writes the value back in the SET that creates a new instance  of intSrvFlowEntry.
If  the  SET  fails with the code 'inconsistentValue', then the process must be  repeated; If the SET succeeds, then the ob  ject is incremented, and the  new  instance  is created according to the manager's directions."
The compliance statement " MODULE
this module MANDATORY GROUPS { intSrvIfAttribGroup, intSrvFlowsGroup } OBJECT
intSrvFlowType MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This may be read only."
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This may  be read only."
This  may  be read only."
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only."
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only."
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only."
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only."
This  may  be read only."
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only."
MIN ACCESS not accessible DESCRIPTION
"This object is needed only in a system that imple  ments IPv6."
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only."
This  may  be read only."
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only."
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION
"read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only."
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only.
This  may  be read only.
MIN ACCESS read only DESCRIPTION "read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only."
"read create access is not required.
This  may  be read only."
intSrvIfAttribStatus } STATUS  current DESCRIPTION
"These objects are required  for  Systems  sup  porting the Integrated Services Architecture."
These objects are required  for  Systems  sup  porting the Integrated Services Architecture."
The use of an SNMP SET results in an RSVP or Integrated Services reservation under rules that are different compared to if the reservation was negotiated using RSVP.
However, no other security considerations exist other than those imposed by SNMP itself.
