Abstract The uniquely map the ASCII codes into corresponding EBCDIC codes in a consistent manner throughout the ARPA Network, this RFC describes and defines the IBM Standard Extended BCD Interchanged Code.
The IBM Corporate Systems Standard, Extended BCD Interchanged Code (EBCDIC) defines 8 bit graphic and control codes (See Figure 1).
The basic EBCDIC code consists of 54 controls (including space) and 88 graphics.
This set is extended to include 10 special graphics and 1 special control (EO).
These special graphics originate from the 7  bit hollerith code and include 6 ASCII graphics.
The EBCDIC code is further extended to include the publishing and printing graphics option which specifics 52 graphics.
Of these graphics, 32 appear on the IBM TN print chain.
Four of these graphics are
duals with graphics not on the TN print chain, and one graphic (degree) is dual with a graphic in the special graphics set of the basic code (tilde).
It is desirable to uniquely map the ASCII codes into corresponding EBCDIC codes in a consistent manner throughout the ARPA network.
For each of the 34 ASCII controls (including space and delete) there is a corresponding BDCDIC control (assigning ASCII control DC3 to the EBCDIC code X'13').
For 85 of the 94 ASCII graphics, there is a corresponding graphic in the basic EBCDIC set.
Three different correspondences can be made for the other 9 ASCII graphics.
IBM recommends the following ASCII duals with the basic EBCDIC graphics.
Special EBCDIC graphics would be used to represent the other ASCII graphics.
a) Associate the following special EBCDIC graphics with the corresponding ASCII graphics.
The codes for open bracket and close bracket are chosen since these graphics appear on the TN print chain.
The codes for left brace and right brace are chosen rather than the codes in the special graphics set for opening brace and closing brace, respectively, since these graphics are similar and also appear on the TN print chain.
a) Associate the following basic EBCDIC graphics with the indicated ASCII graphics because of their graphic similarity.
~ b) Associate the basic EBCDIC graphic for cent with the ASCII graphic for reverse slash.
This choice is made since the cent graphic is not an ASCII graphic and is the only graphic in the basic EBCDIC set which would not otherwise be associated with any ACII graphic.
c) Associate the special EBCDIC graphic grave accent.
`  X'79' with the corresponding ASCII graphic.
Associate the following publishing EBCDIC graphics with the corresponding ASCII graphics.
The codes for open bracket and close bracket are chosen since these graphic appear on the TN print chain.
The codes for left brace and right brace are chosen rather than the codes in the special graphics set for opening brace and closing brace, respectively, since these graphics are similar and also appear on the TN print chain.
In order that the mapping from ASCII into EBCDIC and vice versa could become standardized, I would appreciate comments on the above from each site whose operating system uses EBCDIC as the internal code.
For those sites who may wish to provide our use TELNET services that communicate using an EBCDIC code, a standard code must be specified.
The codes given in Figure 1 can form the basis for a standard.
Specific codes must also be specified for the TELNET control codes.
To eliminate using one code for two graphics, I propose that the TN graphics be associated with their corresponding code.
This would have no effect if the Graphical Correspondence were chosen for the EBCDIC to ASCII mapping with the code X'5F' for logical not associated with tilde.
The other graphics of the publishing and printing option (Double Acute, Inferior Hook, Macron, and Inferior Comma) which are not on the TN print chain but have the same codes as graphics on the TN print chain would not be considered to be part of the standard EBCDIC code.
For ASCII to EBCDIC mapping of the 9 special ASCII graphics
Do you concur with the definition of the standard EBCDIC code, including TELNET control codes?
Please list for your operating system:
a)   graphics not included in the complete EBCDIC code.
b)   Graphics given a different code.
Controls given one of the graphic codes.
Controls given one of the control codes but defined to be a different control e)
All the controls which have meaning with your operating system (i.e., for which special action is taken) and state the action.
[Please view the PDF version of this RFC.]
[Please view the PDF version of this RFC.]
A functional character  [illegible] to control or facilitate transmission of introducing [illegible] communication networks.
A functional character which controls the layout of positioning or information in printing or display devices.
A character which is used to separate and qualify information in a logical sense.
There is a group of four such characters, which are to be used in a hierarchical order.
A functional character used for the control of ancillary devices associated with data processing of telecommunication systems, more especially switching devices "on" and "off".
A control character used by the System/[illegible]...and Mark ([illegible]) instruction for the formatting of alphanumeric fields.
A control character indicating that the core combinations which follow are to be [illegible] in a particular code table, depending upon the particular control character.
A character excluded from future assignment by IBM.
These "protected" codes are intended for use by customer systems so that their use will not conflict with a possible future IBM use.
Figure 4 Categories of Control Functions Hex Code
Question Mark Substitute Blank  SB
This material has not been reviewed for public release and is intended only for use with the ARPA network.
It should not be quoted or cited in any publication not related to the ARPA network.
