Although electronic mail is preferable as a means of third party communication, in some cases it may be necessary to print information, in hard copy form, at a remote location.
The remote output device may consist of a standard line printer, a printer with multiple fonts and faces, a printer that can reproduce graphics, or a facsimile device.
Remote output may be accompanied by information that identifies the intended recipient.
This memo describes a technique for "remote printing" using the Internet mail infrastructure.
In particular, this memo focuses on the case in which remote printers are connected to the international telephone network.
Naming, Addressing, and Routing A printer is identified by a telephone number which corresponds to a G3 facsimile device connected to the international telephone network, e.g.,  1 415 968 2510 where " 1" indicates the IDDD country code, and the remaining string is a telephone number within that country.
This number is used to construct the address of a remote printer server, which forms the recipient address for the message, e.g., either remote printer@0.1.5.2.8.6.9.5.1.4.1.tpc.int or remote printer.ATOM@0.1.5.2.8.6.9.5.1.4.1.tpc.int where "ATOM" is an (optional) RFC 822 atom [1], an opaque string for use in recipient identification when generating a cover sheet, and the domain part is constructed by reversing the telephone number, converting each digit to a domain label, and being placed under "tpc.int.
Note that the mailbox syntax is purposefully restricted in the interests of pragmatism.
Thus, originating user agents should take care in limiting the local part to no more than 70 or so characters.
The message is routed in exactly the same fashion as all other electronic mail, i.e., using the MX algorithm [2].
Since a remote printer server might be able to access many printers, the wildcarding facilities of the DNS [3,4] are used accordingly.
For example, if a remote printer server residing at "dbc.mtview.ca.us" was willing to access any printer with a telephone number prefix of  1 415 968 then this resource record might be present  .8.6.9.5.1.4.1.tpc.int.
Naturally, if several remote printer servers were willing to access any printer in that prefix, multiple MX resource records would be present.
It should be noted that the presence of a wildcard RR which matches a remote printer server's address does not imply that the corresponding telephone number is valid, or, if valid, that a G3 facsimile device is connected at the phone number.
When information is to be remotely printed, the user application constructs an RFC 822 message, containing a "Message ID" field.
If the local part of the address does not contain an opaque string for use in recipient identification, then the body must consist "multipart/mixed" content [5] having at two parts, the first being a "application/remote printing" content type (defined in Appendix A), which will be used to generate a cover sheet, and the second being an arbitrary content type corresponding to the information to be printed.
If the local part of the address does contain an opaque string for use in recipient identification, then the body consists of an arbitrary content type corresponding to the information to be printed.
Regardless, the message is then sent to the remote printer server's electronic mail address.
3.1 Content Types It should be noted that not all content types have a natural printing representation, e.g., an "audio" or "video" content.
For this reason, the second part of the "multipart/mixed" content should be one of the following: text/plain, message/rfc822, application/postscript image/tiff (defined in Appendix B), any multipart.
Note that: (1) With the "text/plain" content type, not all character sets may be available for printing.
(2) With the "message" content type, the subordinate content will be processed recursively.
(3) With the "application/postscript" content type, the remote printer server should evaluate the contents in a safe execution environment.
(4) With the "multipart" content type the subordinate contents will be processed recursively:
for a "multipart/mixed" or "multipart/digest" content, each subordinate content will start on a new page, whilst for a "multipart/parallel" content, all subordinate contents will, if possible, start on the same page.
Naturally, when processing a "multipart/alternative" content, only one subordinate content will be printed.
If the "application/remote printing" content type is present, this contains all the information necessary to generate a cover sheet.
Otherwise, the cover sheet must be generated based on other information available.
Typically, a cover sheet consists of three sections: information identifying the originator; information identifying the recipient; and, additional information supplied by the remote printer server.
To identify the originator, the remote printer server will use the message headers, usually by stripping any trace headers (i.e., "Received" and "Return Path") and then re ordering the remaining headers starting with the "From" header.
To identify the recipient, the opaque string from the local  part of the remote printer server's address is consulted.
For example, if the remote printer server's address is remote printer.
then the opaque string Arlington Hewes/Room 403 is consulted.
A remote printer server will interpret two consecutive underscore characters in the opaque string as a single underscore, and two consecutive solidus characters as a single solidus.
So, the opaque string, Arlington Hewes/Room 403 might appear on the cover sheet as To: Arlington Hewes Room 403 3.3 Return Receipt When the remote printer server finishes its processing, a message is returned to the originator, indicating either success (i.e., the message was successfully sent to the facsimile device), or failure, with an explanation (e.g., after several repeated attempts, there was no answer).
Usage Examples 4.1 Explicit Cover Sheet
Thu, 22 Jul 1993 08:38:00  0800
1 202 628 2042 EMail:
Any text appearing here would go on the cover sheet.
aaaaaaaaaa0 Content Type: text/plain; charset "us ascii"
Thu, 22 Jul 1993 08:38:00  0800
MIME Version: 1.0 Content Type: application/postscript %!
Note that in this latter example, both remote printing and e mail recipients can be identified in the same message.
4.3 Minimal, Text only To:remote printer.
Thu, 22 Jul 1993 08:38:00  0800
Here are my comments... 5.
A prototype implementation is openly available.
The MIME instructions for retrieval are: MIME Version: 1.0 Content Type: multipart/alternative
aaaaaaaaaa0 Content Type: message/external body; access type "mail server"; server "archive server@ftp.ics.uci.edu" Content Type: application/octet stream; type "tar";
x conversions "x compress" Content ID:
Z"; directory "mrose/tpc"; site "ftp.ics.uci.edu
" Content Type: application/octet stream; type "tar";
x conversions "x compress" Content ID:
This package contains software for UNIX based systems, and was developed and tested under SunOS, with an openly available facsimile package (Sam Leffler's FlexFAX package), and contains information for sites acting as either client or server participants, and zone administrators.
Future Issues Note that several issues are not addressed, e.g., determining which content types and character sets are supported by a remote printer server; introduction of authentication, integrity, privacy, authorization, and accounting services; preferential selection of a remote printer server; and, aggregation of multiple print recipients in a single message.
Subsequent work might consider these issues in detail.
Security Considerations Internet mail may be subject to monitoring by third parties, and in particular, message relays.
The application/remote printing Content Type (1) MIME type name: application (2) MIME subtype name: remote printing (3)
Security considerations: none (7) Specification:
The "application/remote printing" content type contains originator and recipient information used when generating a cover sheet.
> CRLF <address info> <originator info
The image/tiff Content Type (1)
MIME type name: image (2) MIME subtype name: tiff (3)
(5) Encoding considerations: base64 (6) Security considerations:
TIFF class F, as defined in: Tag Image File Format (TIFF)  revision 6.0 Developer's Desk Aldus Corporation 411 First Ave.
South Suite 200 Seattle, WA  98104 206 622 5500
