Abstract This document defines an UNSELECT command that can be used to close the current mailbox in an Internet Message Access Protocol version 4 (IMAP4) session without expunging it.
Certain types of IMAP clients need to release resources associated with the selected mailbox without selecting a different mailbox.
While IMAP4 provides this functionality (via a SELECT command with a nonexistent mailbox name or reselecting the same mailbox with EXAMINE command), a more clean solution is desirable.
Certain types of IMAP clients need to release resources associated with the selected mailbox without selecting a different mailbox.
While [IMAP4] provides this functionality (via a SELECT command with a nonexistent mailbox name or reselecting the same mailbox with EXAMINE command), a more clean solution is desirable.
[IMAP4] defines the CLOSE command that closes the selected mailbox as well as permanently removes all messages with the \Deleted flag set.
However [IMAP4] lacks a command that simply closes the mailbox without expunging it.
This document defines the UNSELECT command for this purpose.
A server which supports this extension indicates this with a capability name of "UNSELECT".
"C:" and "S:" in examples show lines sent by the client and server respectively.
The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY" in this document when typed in uppercase are to be interpreted as defined in "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" [KEYWORDS].
none Responses:  no specific responses for this command
OK unselect completed, now in authenticated state BAD no mailbox selected, or argument supplied but none permitted The UNSELECT command frees server's resources associated with the selected mailbox and returns the server to the authenticated state.
This command performs the same actions as CLOSE, except that no messages are permanently removed from the currently selected mailbox.
A341 OK Unselect completed 3.
It is believed that this extension doesn't raise any additional security concerns not already discussed in [IMAP4].
The following syntax specification uses the Augmented Backus Naur Form (ABNF) notation as specified in [ABNF].
Non terminals referenced but not defined below are as defined by [IMAP4].
Except as noted otherwise, all alphabetic characters are case  insensitive.
The use of upper or lower case characters to define token strings is for editorial clarity only.
Implementations MUST accept these strings in a case insensitive fashion.
IANA Considerations IMAP4 capabilities are registered by publishing a standards track or IESG approved experimental RFC.
The registry is currently located at: http://www.iana.org/assignments/imap4 capabilities This document defines the UNSELECT IMAP capabilities.
IANA has added this capability to the registry.
