HORIZONTAL TAB DISPOSITION OPTION 1.
Command name and code NAOHTD 12
(Negotiate About Output Horizontal Tab Disposition)
In the following, we are discussing a simplex connection, as described in the NAOL and NAOP Telnet options.
The data sender requests or agrees to negotiate about output horizontal tab character disposition with the data receiver.
In the case where agreement has been reached and in the absence of further subnegotiations, the data receiver is assumed to be handling output horizontal tab character considerations.
The data sender refuses to negotiate about output horizontal tab characters with the data receiver, or demands a return to the unnegotiated default mode.
IAC WILL NAOHTD The data receiver requests or agrees to negotiate about output horizontal tab characters with the sender.
In the case where agreement has been reached and in the absence of further subnegotiations, the data receiver alone is assumed to be handling output horizontal tab character considerations.
The data receiver refuses to negotiate about output horizontal tab characters, or demands a return to the unnegotiated default mode.
IAC SB NAOHTD DS <8 bit value> IAC SE
The data sender specifies, with the 8 bit value, which party should handle output horizontal tab characters and what their disposition should be.
The code for DS is 1.
DR <8 bit value> IAC SE
The data receiver specifies, with the 8 bit value, which party should handle output horizontal tab characters and what their disposition should be.
The code for DR is 0.
In the default absence of negotiations concerning which party, data sender or data receiver, is handling output horizontal tab character considerations, neither party is required to handle horizontal tab characters and neither party is prohibited from handling them; but it is appropriate if at least the data receiver handles horizontal tab character considerations, albeit primitively.
The value is the number of character times to wait or number of NULs to insert in the data stream before sending the next data character.
Note that, due to the assynchrony of the two simplex connections, phase problems can occur with this option.
The guiding rules are that: 1) if neither data receiver nor data sender wants to handle output horizontal tab characters, the data receiver must do it, and 2) if both data receiver and data sender wants to handle output horizontal tab characters, the data sender gets to do it.
The reasoning for the former rule is that if neither wants to do it, then the default in the NAOHTD option dominates.
If both want to do it, the sender, who is presumed to have special knowledge about the data, should be allowed to do it, taking into account any suggestions the receiver may make.
Simulation is defined as the replacement of the horizontal tab character by enough spaces to move the printer head (or line pointer) to the next horizontal tab stop.
Note that delays, controlled by the data sender, must consist of NUL characters inserted immediately after the horizontal tab character.
This is necessary due to the assynchrony of network transmissions.
As with all option negotiations, neither party should suggest a state already in effect except to refuse to negotiate; changes should be acknowledged; and once refused, an option should not be resuggested until "something
