Abstract This document describes a URN (Uniform Resource Name) namespace that is engineered by the Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) for naming persistent resources stored in the XML.org repository (such as XML (Extensible Markup Language)
Document Type Definitions, XML Schemas, Namespaces, Stylesheets, and other documents).
The XML.org Registry is provided by XML.org as a public service where XML schemas, DTDs, stylesheets, and other documents can be shared.
Documents are submitted to a repository then retrieved by others who may want to use them.
These documents require unique identifiers.
Motivated by these observations, XML.org would like to assign URNs to some resources in order to retain unique, permanent location  independent names for them.
This namespace specification is for a formal namespace.
Specification Template Namespace ID: "xmlorg" requested.
Registration Version Number: 3 Registration Date: 2001 02
05 Declared registrant of the namespace:
Karl Best OASIS Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards Post Office Box
455 Billerica, MA USA 01821
667 5115 Declaration of structure: The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs assigned by XML.org will have the following hierarchical structure: There is one branch at the top of the hierarchy: "objects".
The general structure of the NSS in the names hierarchy has the form:
objects:{type}{:subtype}?:{object id} where "type" identifies the document type (document, schema, stylesheet, entity, xmlns, etc.), the optional "subtype" provides additional information about the document type (for example, stylesheet or schema language), and "object id" is a unique identifier for the document.
The Director of Technical Operations at OASIS assigns document types, subtypes, and all unique identifiers.
: Identifier uniqueness will be enforced by the Director of Technical Operations who assigns unique identifiers to all documents identified by URN.
Identifier persistence considerations: OASIS is committed to maintaining the accessibility and persistence of all the resources that are assigned URNs.
Assignment is limited to the owner and those authorities that are specifically designated by the owner.
OASIS may assign portions of its namespace for assignment by other parties.
Process of identifier resolution: The owner will distribute catalogs (OASIS TR9401 Catalogs) that map the assigned URNs to resource identifiers (e.g., URLs).
A more interactive, online resolution system will also be deployed in the near future.
The owner will authorize additional resolution services as appropriate.
Rules for Lexical Equivalence: URNs are lexically equivalent if they are lexically identical.
Conformance with URN Syntax: No special considerations.
The owner will publish OASIS TR9401 Catalogs.
The presence of a URN in a catalog indicates that it is valid.
The following examples are not guaranteed to be real.
They are listed for pedagogical reasons only.
There are no additional security considerations other than those normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.
