On the first day of Christmas, technology gave to me:
A database with a broken b tree (what the hell is a b tree anyway?)
On the second day of Christmas, technology gave to me: Two transceiver failures (CRC errors?
And a database with a broken b tree (Rebuild WHAT?
On the third day of Christmas, technology gave to me:
Three French users (who, of course, think they know everything)
Two transceiver failures (which are now spewing packets all over the net) And a database with a broken b tree (Backup?
On the fourth day of Christmas, technology gave to me: Four calls for support (playing the same Christmas song over and over)
Three French users (Why do they like to argue so much over trivial things?)
Two transceiver failures (How the hell do I know which ones they are?)
And a database with a broken b tree (Pointer error?
On the fifth day of Christmas, technology gave to me: Five golden SCSI contacts (Of course they're better than silver!)
Four support calls (Ever notice how time stands still when on hold?
Three French users (No, we don't have footpedals on PC's.
Two transceiver failures (If I knew which ones were bad, I would know which ones to fix!)
And a database with a broken b tree (Not till next week?
On the sixth day of Christmas, technology gave to me:
Six games a playing (On the production network, of course!)
Five golden SCSI contacts (What do you mean "not terminated!")
Four support calls (No, don't transfer me again do you HEAR?
Three French users (No, you cannot scan in by putting the page to the screen...)
(I can't look at the LEDs they're in the ceiling!)
And a database with a broken b tree (Norway?
That's where this was written?)
On the seventh day of Christmas, technology gave to me: Seven license failures
(Please stop tying up the PBX to talk to each other!)
(What do you mean I need "wide" SCSI?)
Four support calls (At least the Muzak is different this time...)
Well, monsieur, there really isn't an "any" key, but...)
If I knew I would set it myself!)
And a database with a broken b tree (
No, I really need to talk to Lars NOW!)
On the eighth day of Christmas, technology gave to me: Eight MODEMs dialing (Who bought these?
Seven license failures (How many WEEKS to get a license?)
(What do you mean one pixel per packet on updates?!?)
Five golden SCSI contacts (Fast SCSI?
It's supposed to be fast, isn't it?)
Four support calls (I already told them that!
Don't transfer me back DAMN!)
Three French users (No, CTL ALT DEL is not the proper way to end a program)
Two transceiver failures (What do you mean "babbling transceiver"?)
And a database with a broken b tree (Does anyone speak English in Oslo?)
On the ninth day of Christmas, technology gave to me:
Nine lady executives with attitude (She said do WHAT with the servers?)
Seven license failures (We sent the P.O. two months ago!)
(HOW many people are doing this to the network?)
Five golden SCSI contacts (What do you mean two have the same ID?)
Four support calls (No, I am not at the console I tried that already.)
Three French users (No, only one floppy fits at a time?
And a database with a broken b tree (No, I am trying to find Lars!
On the tenth day of Christmas, technology gave to me:
Ten SNMP alerts flashing (What is that Godawful beeping?)
Nine lady executives with attitude
(No, it used to be a mens room?
We don't allow Internet here!)
Why are they calling us?)
(No, you don't need a graphics accelerator for Lotus! )
Five golden SCSI contacts (You mean I need ANOTHER cable?)
Four support calls (No, I never needed an account number before...)
Three French users (When the PC sounds like a cat, it's a head crash!)
Two transceiver failures (Power connection?
And a database with a broken b tree (Restore what index pointers?)
On the eleventh day of Christmas, technology gave to me:
(What is that terrible smell?)
Ten SNMP alerts flashing (What's a MIB, anyway?
Nine lady executives with attitude (Mauve?
Our computer room tiles in mauve?)
(What do you mean you let your roommate dial in?)
Six games a playing (I told you AFTER HOURS!)
Five golden SCSI contacts (If I knew what was wrong, I wouldn't be calling!)
Four support calls (Put me on hold again and I will slash your credit rating!)
Three French users (Don't hang your floppies with a magnet again!)
Two transceiver failures (How should I know if the connector is bad?)
And a database with a broken b tree (I already did all of that!)
On the twelfth day of Christmas, technology gave to me: Twelve virtual pipe connections (There's only supposed to be two!)
Eleven boards a frying (What a surge suppressor supposed to do, anyway?)
Ten SNMP alerts flashing (From a distance, it does kinda look like XMas lights.)
Nine lady executives with attitude (What do you mean aerobics before backups?)
(No, we never use them to connect during business hours.)
Seven license failures (We're all going to jail, I just know it.)
Six games a playing (
No, no my turn, my turn!)
Five golden SCSI contacts (Great, just great!
Now it won't even boot!)
Four support calls (I don't have that package!
How did I end up with you!)
Three French users (I don't care if it is sexy, no more nude screen backgrounds!)
(Maybe we should switch to token ring...)
And a database with a broken b tree (No, operator Oslo, Norway.
We were just talking and were cut off...)
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
