Abstract This document establishes an Internet Assigned Number Authority (IANA) registry for Content Security Policy directives and populates that registry with the directives defined in the Content Security Policy Level 2 specification.
The Content Security Policy (CSP) specification [CSP] defines a mechanism that web developers can use to control the resources that a particular page can fetch or execute, as well as a number of additional security relevant policy decisions.
The policy language specified in that document consists of an extensible set of "directives", each of which controls a specific resource type or policy decision.
This specification establishes a registry to ensure that extensions to CSP are listed and standardized.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Use of the Registry Content Security Policy directives must be documented in a readily available public specification in order to be registered by IANA.
This documentation MUST fully explain the syntax, intended usage, and semantics of the directive.
The intent of this requirement is to assure interoperable independent implementations, and to prevent accidental namespace collisions between implementations of dissimilar features.
Documents defining new Content Security Policy directives MUST register them with IANA, as described in Section 3.
The IANA registration policy for such parameters is "Specification Required"
[RFC5226] and is further discussed in Section 3.2.
This specification creates a new top level IANA registry named "Content Security Policy Directives".
Content Security Policy Directives Registry New Content Security Policy directives, and updates to existing directives, MUST be registered with IANA.
When registering a new Content Security Policy directive, the following information MUST be provided:  The directive's name, an ASCII string conforming to the "directive name" rule specified in Section 4.1 of [CSP].
The ABNF [RFC5234] is as follows:
A reference to the readily available public specification defining the new directive's syntax, usage, and semantics.
The following table contains the initial values for this registry:
Registration Policy for Content Security Policy Directives
The registration policy for Content Security Policy directives is "Specification Required" [RFC5226], which uses a designated expert to review the specification.
When appointing an Expert (or Experts), the IESG SHOULD draw from the W3C's security community, coordinating through the liaison.
The designated expert, when deliberating on whether to include a new directive in the registry, SHOULD consider the following criteria.
This is not an exhaustive list, but representative of the issues to consider when rendering a decision:  Content Security Policy is a restrictive feature, which allows web developers to deny themselves access to resources and APIs that would otherwise be available.
Deploying Content Security Policy is, therefore, a strict reduction in risk.
The expert SHOULD carefully consider whether proposed directives would violate this property.
Granular directives are valuable, but the expert SHOULD strive to strike a reasonable balance between providing developers with all the knobs and switches possible and providing only those with known security implications.
The registry in this document does not in itself have security implications.
The directives specified, however, certainly do.
The documents referenced when registering new directives MUST contain detailed security and privacy considerations sections, and SHOULD contain usage information that informs web developers as to the directive's expected implementation.
