Abstract This document defines a YANG data model that can be used to configure and manage Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) and Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) devices.
[RFC7950] is a data definition language that was introduced to model the configuration and running state of a device managed using network management protocols such as NETCONF [RFC6241] or RESTCONF [RFC8040].
YANG is now also being used as a component of wider management interfaces, such as command line interfaces (CLIs).
This document defines a YANG data model that can be used to configure and manage Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) and Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) devices.
The protocol versions include IGMPv1 [RFC1112], IGMPv2
IGMPv3 [RFC3376], MLDv1 [RFC2710], and MLDv2 [RFC3810].
The core features of the IGMP and MLD protocols are defined as required.
Non core features are defined as optional in the provided data model.
The YANG data model in this document conforms to the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA) [RFC8342].
The following abbreviations are used in this document and the defined model:
IGMP:  Internet Group Management Protocol [RFC3376].
MLD:  Multicast Listener Discovery [RFC3810].
SSM:  Source Specific Multicast service model [RFC3569]
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
Tree Diagrams Tree diagrams used in this document follow the notation defined in [RFC8340].
Prefixes in Data Node Names
In this document, names of data nodes, actions, and other data model objects are often used without a prefix, as long as it is clear from the context in which YANG module each name is defined.
Otherwise, names are prefixed using the standard prefix associated with the corresponding YANG module, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Prefixes and Corresponding YANG Modules 2.
Design of the Data Model 2.1.
The model covers IGMPv1 [RFC1112], IGMPv2
IGMPv3 [RFC3376], MLDv1 [RFC2710], and MLDv2 [RFC3810].
This model does not cover other IGMP  and MLD related protocols such as IGMP/MLD Proxy [RFC4605] or IGMP/MLD Snooping [RFC4541] etc., which will be specified in separate documents.
This model can be used to configure and manage various versions of IGMP and MLD protocols.
The operational state data and statistics can be retrieved by this model.
Even though no protocol specific notifications are defined in this model, the subscription and push mechanism defined in [RFC8639] and [RFC8641] can be implemented by the user to subscribe to notifications on the data nodes in this model.
The model contains all the basic configuration parameters to operate the protocols listed above.
Depending on the implementation choices, some systems may not allow some of the advanced parameters to be configurable.
The occasionally implemented parameters are modeled as optional features in this model, while the rarely implemented parameters are not included in this model and left for augmentation.
This model can be extended, and it has been structured in a way that such extensions can be conveniently made.
The protocol parameters covered in this model can been seen from the model structure described in Section 3.
The protocol parameters that were considered but are not covered in this model are described in the following sections.
Not Covered at the Global Level
The configuration parameters and operational states not covered on an IGMP instance or an MLD instance are:
Other querier present time    Send router alert
Startup query interval    Startup query count 2.1.2.
Not Covered at the Interface Level
The configuration parameters and operational states not covered on an IGMP interface or an MLD interface
Maximum number of sources    Other querier present time
Passive mode    Promiscuous mode    Query before immediate leave    Send router alert 2.2.
This model is designed to represent the capabilities of IGMP and MLD devices with various specifications, including the basic capability subsets of the IGMP and MLD protocols.
The main design goals of this document are that the basic capabilities described in the model are supported by any major now existing implementation, and that the configuration of all implementations meeting the specifications is easy to express through some combination of the optional features in the model and simple vendor augmentations.
There is also value in widely supported features being standardized, to provide a standardized way to access these features, to save work for individual vendors, and so that mapping between different vendors' configuration is not needlessly complicated.
Therefore, this model declares a number of features representing capabilities that not all deployed devices support.
The extensive use of feature declarations should also substantially simplify the capability negotiation process for a vendor's IGMP and MLD implementations.
On the other hand, operational state parameters are not so widely designated as features, as there are many cases where the defaulting of an operational state parameter would not cause any harm to the system, and it is much more likely that an implementation without native support for a piece of operational state would be able to derive a suitable value for a state variable that is not natively supported.
Position of Address Family in Hierarchy
The protocol IGMP only supports IPv4, while the protocol MLD only supports IPv6.
The data model defined in this document can be used for both IPv4 and IPv6 address families.
This document defines IGMP and MLD as separate schema branches in the structure.
The model can support IGMP (IPv4), MLD (IPv6), or both optionally and independently.
Such flexibility cannot be achieved cleanly with a combined branch.
The structure is consistent with other YANG data models such as RFC 8344, which uses separate branches for IPv4 and IPv6.
The separate branches for IGMP and MLD can accommodate their differences better and cleaner.
The two branches can better support different features and node types.
This model augments the core routing data model specified in [RFC8349].
rw routing  rw router id?
Augmented by this Model ...
Augmented by this Model ...
The "igmp" container instantiates an IGMP protocol of version IGMPv1, IGMPv2, or IGMPv3.
The "mld" container instantiates an MLD protocol of version MLDv1 or MLDv2.
The YANG data model defined in this document conforms to the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA) [RFC8342].
The operational state data is combined with the associated configuration data in the same hierarchy [RFC8407].
A configuration data node is marked as mandatory only when its value must be provided by the user.
Where nodes are not essential to protocol operation, they are marked as optional.
Some other nodes are essential but have a default specified, so that they are also optional and need not be configured explicitly.
IGMP Configuration and Operational State
The IGMP data is modeled as a schema subtree augmenting the "control  plane protocol" data node under "/rt:routing/
control plane  protocols" in the module ietf routing, following the convention described in [RFC8349].
The augmentation to the module ietf routing allows this model to support multiple instances of IGMP, but a restriction MAY be added depending on the implementation and the device.
The identity "igmp" is derived from the "rt:control plane  protocol" base identity and indicates that a control plane protocol instance is IGMP.
The IGMP subtree is a three level hierarchy structure as listed below:
Global level:  Including IGMP configuration and operational state attributes for the entire IGMP protocol instance in this router.
Interface global level:  Including configuration data nodes that are applicable to all the interfaces whose corresponding nodes are not defined or not configured at the interface level.
For such a node at the interface level, the system uses the same value of the corresponding node at the interface global level.
Interface level:  Including IGMP configuration and operational state attributes specific to the given interface.
For a configuration node at the interface level, there may exist a corresponding configuration node with the same name at the interface global level.
The value configured on a node at the interface level overrides the value configured on the corresponding node at the interface global level.
:control plane protocol:  rw igmp {feature igmp}?
rw last member query interval?
rw query max response time?
rw max groups per interface?
[interface name]  rw interface name
interface ref  rw last member query interval?
rw query max response time?
[source address]  ro source address    inet:
[host address] {intf explicit tracking}?
ipv4 address  ro host filter mode    enumeration 3.2.
MLD Configuration and Operational State
The MLD data is modeled as a schema subtree augmenting the "control  plane protocol" data node under "/rt:routing/
control plane  protocols" in the module ietf routing, following the convention described in [RFC8349].
The augmentation to the module ietf routing allows this model to support multiple instances of MLD, but a restriction MAY be added depending on the implementation and the device.
The identity "mld" is derived from the "rt:control plane  protocol" base identity and indicates that a control plane protocol instance is MLD.
The MLD subtree is a three level hierarchy structure as listed below:
Global level:  Including MLD configuration and operational state attributes for the entire MLD protocol instance in this router.
Interface global level:  Including configuration data nodes that are applicable to all the interfaces whose corresponding nodes are not defined or not configured at the interface level.
For such a node at the interface level, the system uses the same value of the corresponding node at the interface global level.
Interface level:  Including MLD configuration and operational state attributes specific to the given interface.
For a configuration node at the interface level, there may exist a corresponding configuration node with the same name at the interface global level.
The value configured on a node at the interface level overrides the value configured on the corresponding node at the interface global level.
:control plane protocol:  rw mld {feature mld}?
rw last member query interval?
rw query max response time?
rw max groups per interface?
[interface name]  rw interface name
interface ref  rw last member query interval?
rw query max response time?
[source address]  ro source address    inet:
[host address] {intf explicit tracking}?
ipv6 address  ro host filter mode    enumeration 3.3.
IGMP and MLD Actions IGMP and MLD each have one action that clears the group membership cache entries for that protocol.
:control plane protocol:  rw igmp {feature igmp}?
x clear groups {action clear groups}?
ipv4 multicast source address augment /rt:
:control plane protocol:  rw mld {feature mld}?
x clear groups {action clear groups}?
ipv6 multicast source address 4.
IGMP and MLD YANG Module
This module references [RFC1112], [RFC2236], [RFC2710], [RFC3376], [RFC3810], [RFC5790], [RFC6636], [RFC6991], [RFC8294], [RFC8343], [RFC8344], [RFC8349], and [RFC8519].
<CODE BEGINS> file "ietf igmp
" module ietf igmp mld { yang version 1.1; namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf igmp mld";
Anish Peter <mailto:anish.ietf@gmail.com>"; description "
The module defines the configuration and operational state for the Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) and Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) protocols.
The key words 'MUST', 'MUST NOT', 'REQUIRED', 'SHALL', 'SHALL NOT', 'SHOULD', 'SHOULD NOT', 'RECOMMENDED', 'NOT RECOMMENDED', 'MAY', and 'OPTIONAL' in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 (RFC 2119)
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of the code.
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license info).
This version of this YANG module is part of RFC 8652; see the RFC itself for full legal notices."; revision 2019 11 01 { description "Initial revision."
/ identity igmp { if feature "feature igmp"; base rt:
control plane protocol; description "IGMP protocol."
This grouping is used in either IGMP schema or MLD schema.
When used in IGMP schema, this grouping contains the global configuration for IGMP; when used in MLD schema, this grouping contains the global configuration for MLD."
; leaf enabled { if feature "global admin enable"; type boolean; default "true"; description "When this grouping is used for IGMP, this leaf indicates whether IGMP is enabled ('true') or disabled ('false') in the routing instance.
When this grouping is used for MLD, this leaf indicates whether MLD is enabled ('true') or disabled ('false') in the routing instance."
; } leaf max entries { if feature "global max entries"; type uint32; description "When this grouping is used for IGMP, this leaf indicates the maximum number of entries in the IGMP instance.
When this grouping is used for MLD, this leaf indicates the maximum number of entries in the MLD instance.
If this leaf is not specified, the number of entries is not limited."
; } leaf max groups { if feature "global max groups"; type uint32; description "When this grouping is used for IGMP, this leaf indicates the maximum number of groups in the IGMP instance.
When this grouping is used for MLD, this leaf indicates the maximum number of groups in the MLD instance.
This grouping is used in either IGMP schema or MLD schema.
When used in IGMP schema, this grouping contains the global IGMP state attributes; when used in MLD schema, this grouping contains the global MLD state attributes."
; leaf entries count { type uint32; config false; description "When this grouping is used for IGMP, this leaf indicates the number of entries in the IGMP instance.
When this grouping is used for MLD, this leaf indicates the number of entries in the MLD instance."
; } leaf groups count { type uint32; config false; description "When this grouping is used for IGMP, this leaf indicates the number of existing groups in the IGMP instance.
When this grouping is used for MLD, this leaf indicates the number of existing groups in the MLD instance."
; } container statistics { config false; description "When this grouping is used for IGMP, this container contains the statistics for the IGMP instance.
When this grouping is used for MLD, this leaf indicates the statistics for the MLD instance."; leaf discontinuity time { type yang:date and time; description "The time on the most recent occasion at which any one or more of the statistic counters suffered a discontinuity.
If no such discontinuities have occurred since the last re initialization of the local management subsystem, then this node contains the time the local management subsystem re initialized itself."
common config attributes { description "Configuration attributes
applied to both the interface global level and interface level."
This leaf is not applicable for version 1 of the IGMP.
For version 2 and version 3 of the IGMP, and for all versions of the MLD, the default value of this leaf is 1.
This leaf may be configured at the interface level or the interface global level, with precedence given to the value at the interface level.
If the leaf is not configured at either level, the default value is used."; reference "Section 8.8 of RFC 2236: Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 2.
Section 8.8 of RFC 3376:
Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 3.
Section 7.8 of RFC 2710: Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) for IPv6.
Section 9.8 of RFC 3810:
Multicast Listener Discovery Version 2
In RFC 3376, the Querier's Query Interval (QQI) is represented from the Querier's Query Interval Code (QQIC) in query message as follows:
If QQIC < 128, QQI   QQIC.
If QQIC >  128, QQIC represents a floating point value as follows: 0
The maximum value of QQI is 31744.
The default value is 125.
This leaf may be configured at the interface level or the interface global level, with precedence given to the value at the interface level.
If the leaf is not configured at either level, the default value is used."
The default value is 10.
This leaf may be configured at the interface level or the interface global level, with precedence given to the value at the interface level.
If the leaf is not configured at either level, the default value is used."
When this leaf is not configured, the server uses the following rules to determine the operational value of this leaf: if this grouping is used in IGMP schema and the value of the leaf 'version' is 1, the value 'false' is operationally used by the server; if this grouping is used in IGMP schema and the value of the leaf 'version' is 2 or 3, the value 'true' is operationally used by the server; if this grouping is used in MLD schema, the value 'true' is operationally used by the server.
This leaf may be configured at the interface level or the interface global level, with precedence given to the value at the interface level.
If the leaf is not configured at either level, the default value is used."
The default value is 2.
This leaf may be configured at the interface level or the interface global level, with precedence given to the value at the interface level.
If the leaf is not configured at either level, the default value is used."
The default value is 2.
This leaf may be configured at the interface level or the interface global level, with precedence given to the value at the interface level.
If the leaf is not configured at either level, the default value is used."
The default value is 2.
This leaf may be configured at the interface level or the interface global level, with precedence given to the value at the interface level.
If the leaf is not configured at either level, the default value is used."
; uses interface common config attributes igmp; uses interface global config attributes; } grouping interfaces config attributes mld { description "Configuration attributes applied to the interface global level for MLD."; uses interface common config attributes mld; uses interface global config attributes; } grouping interface level config attributes { description "This grouping is used in either IGMP schema or MLD schema.
When used in IGMP schema, this grouping contains the IGMP configuration attributes that are defined at the interface level but are not defined at the interface global level; when used in MLD schema, this grouping contains the MLD configuration attributes that are defined at the interface level but are not defined at the interface global level."
; leaf enabled { if feature "intf admin enable"; type boolean; default "true"; description "When this grouping is used for IGMP, this leaf indicates whether IGMP is enabled ('true') or disabled ('false') on the interface.
When this grouping is used for IGMP, this leaf specifies the name of the access policy used to filter the IGMP membership.
When this grouping is used for MLD, this leaf specifies the name of the access policy used to filter the MLD membership.
The value space of this leaf is restricted to the existing policy instances defined by the referenced schema in RFC 8519.
As specified by RFC 8519, the length of the name is between 1 and 64; a device MAY further restrict the length of this name; space and special characters are not allowed.
If this leaf is not specified, no policy is applied, and all packets received from this interface are accepted."
If the router is IGMP enabled, it sends an IGMP last member query with a last member query response time.
However, the router does not wait for the response time before it prunes the group.
When this grouping is used for MLD, the presence of this leaf requests MLD to perform an immediate leave upon receiving an MLDv1 leave message.
If the router is MLD enabled, it sends an MLD last member query with a last member query response time.
However, the router does not wait for the response time before it prunes the group."
; } leaf max groups { if feature "intf max groups"; type uint32; description "When this grouping is used for IGMP, this leaf indicates the maximum number of groups associated with the IGMP interface.
When this grouping is used for MLD, this leaf indicates the maximum number of groups associated with the MLD interface.
The value space of this leaf is restricted to the existing policy instances defined by the referenced schema in RFC 8519.
As specified by RFC 8519, the length of the name is between 1 and 64; a device MAY further restrict the length of this name; space and special characters are not allowed.
When this grouping is used for MLD, the presence of this leaf enables an MLD based explicit membership tracking function for multicast routers and MLD proxy devices supporting MLDv2.
The explicit membership tracking function contributes to saving network resources and shortening leave latency.
; description "When this grouping is used for IGMP, the presence of this leaf enables the support of the simplified EXCLUDE filter in the Lightweight IGMPv3 protocol, which simplifies the standard versions of IGMPv3.
When this grouping is used for MLD, the presence of this leaf enables the support of the simplified EXCLUDE filter in the Lightweight MLDv2 protocol, which simplifies the standard versions of MLDv2."
The router joins this multicast group on the interface."
interface config attributes igmp grouping
interface config attributes mld { description "Per interface configuration attributes for MLD."; uses interface common config attributes mld; uses interface level config attributes; leaf list join group { if feature "intf join group"; type rt types:ipv6 multicast group address; description "
The router joins this multicast group on the interface."
mld grouping interface state attributes { description "Per interface state attributes for both IGMP and MLD."
; leaf oper status { type enumeration { enum up { description "Ready to pass packets."
; } enum down { description "The interface does not pass any packets."
; mandatory true; description "Indicates whether the operational state of the interface is up or down."
ipv4 address; description "The IPv4 address of the last host that has sent the report to join the multicast group."
ipv4 address; description "The IPv4 address of the last host that has sent the report to join the multicast source and group."
interface state attributes igmp grouping interface state attributes mld { description "Per interface state attributes for MLD.
ipv6 address; description "Multicast source address in group record."
; } uses interface state source attributes; leaf last reporter { type inet:
ipv6 address; description "The IPv6 address of the last host that has sent the report to join the multicast source and group."
interface state attributes mld grouping
interface state group attributes grouping interface state source attributes { description "Per interface state attributes for both IGMP and MLD source group records."
This augmentation is only valid for a control plane protocol instance of IGMP (type 'igmp').
; } description "IGMP augmentation to routing control plane protocol configuration and state."
; } description "Reference to an entry in the global interface list."
; } uses interface config attributes igmp { if feature "per interface config"; refine "last member query interval"
ipv4 multicast group address; } mandatory true; description "Multicast group IPv4 address.
This augmentation is only valid for a control plane protocol instance of IGMP (type 'mld').
; } description "Reference to an entry in the global interface list."
ipv6 multicast group address; } description "Multicast group IPv6 address.
The YANG module specified in this document defines a schema for data that is designed to be accessed via network management protocols such as NETCONF [RFC6241] or RESTCONF [RFC8040].
The lowest NETCONF layer is the secure transport layer, and the mandatory to implement secure transport is Secure Shell (SSH) [RFC6242].
The lowest RESTCONF layer is HTTPS, and the mandatory to implement secure transport is TLS [RFC8446].
The Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM)
[RFC8341] provides the means to restrict access for particular NETCONF or RESTCONF users to a preconfigured subset of all available NETCONF or RESTCONF protocol operations and content.
There are a number of data nodes defined in this YANG module that are writable/creatable/deletable (i.e., config true, which is the default).
These data nodes may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
Write operations (e.g., edit config) to these data nodes without proper protection can have a negative effect on network operations.
These are the subtrees and data nodes and their sensitivity/vulnerability:
/rt:control plane protocol/igmp mld:igmp, igmp mld:
This subtree specifies the configuration for the IGMP attributes at the global level on an IGMP instance.
Modifying the configuration can cause IGMP membership to be deleted or reconstructed on all the interfaces of an IGMP instance.
This subtree specifies the configuration for the IGMP attributes at the interface global level on an IGMP instance.
Modifying the configuration can cause IGMP membership to be deleted or reconstructed on all the interfaces of an IGMP instance.
This subtree specifies the configuration for the IGMP attributes at the interface level on an IGMP instance.
Modifying the configuration can cause IGMP membership to be deleted or reconstructed on a specific interface of an IGMP instance.
This subtree specifies the configuration for the MLD attributes at the global level on an MLD instance.
Modifying the configuration can cause MLD membership to be deleted or reconstructed on all the interfaces of an MLD instance.
This subtree specifies the configuration for the MLD attributes at the interface global level on an MLD instance.
Modifying the configuration can cause MLD membership to be deleted or reconstructed on all the interfaces of an MLD instance.
This subtree specifies the configuration for the MLD attributes at the interface level on a device.
Modifying the configuration can cause MLD membership to be deleted or reconstructed on a specific interface of an MLD instance.
Unauthorized access to any data node of these subtrees can adversely affect the membership records of multicast routing subsystem on the local device.
This may lead to network malfunctions, delivery of packets to inappropriate destinations, and other problems.
Some of the readable data nodes in this YANG module may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
It is thus important to control
read access (e.g., via get, get config, or notification) to these data nodes.
These are the subtrees and data nodes and their sensitivity/vulnerability:
Unauthorized access to any data node of the above subtree can disclose the operational state information of IGMP or MLD on this device.
Some of the action operations in this YANG module may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
It is thus important to control access to these operations.
These are the operations and their sensitivity/vulnerability:
clear groups Unauthorized access to any of the above action operations can delete the IGMP or MLD membership records on this device.
This document registers the following namespace URIs in the IETF XML registry [RFC3688]:
N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
This document registers the following YANG modules in the YANG Module Names registry [RFC6020]
igmp mld Reference:  RFC 8652
Contributors Yisong Liu Huawei Technologies China Email:
