C.  Channel Control Flow control in NETRJS is handled by the Network protocol ALL mechanism.
Before transmission of a stream of records can begin on a particular channel, the remote site must issue an RFC and Central must reply.
This allows the central site to determine the remote configuration dynamically.
A particular card reader, printer, or punch channel is open only while it is active, so the receiver need not tie up buffer space needlessly.
Each of these channels, when open, assumes a buffer allocation of at least 900 bytes at the receiver.
The operator input and output channels, on the other hand, are open throughout the session.
On these channels the receiver must provide an allocation of at least 130 bytes.
After sending the SIGNON command over the operator input channel, the remote site should send RFC's for all output channels which are ready to receive data.
When output is available for that site, Central returns an RFC and begins transmission.
Central closes an output channel (socket i and j) at the end of the output for each complete batch job.[4]
The remote site must then send a new RFC and Central must reply with an RFC to start output for another job to that device.
This gives the remote site a chance to allocate a new file for each job without breaking the output within a job.
If the user at the remote site wants to cancel (or backspace or defer) the output of a particular job, he enters appropriate RJS commands[2] on the operator input channel.
When the remote site is ready to submit a job (or stack of consecutive jobs), it issues an RFC for the card reader input channel.
The remote site is not required to close the channel (socket c) after each job in a "stack" of jobs, but he must close it following the last job in the stack to initiate its processing.
It may be necessary for the receiver site to abort a particular channel, perhaps due to a transmission error (see Section D below on checking) or a disk I/O error.
The receiver may abort a channel (other than console output) by closing it (sockets d, e, f, and
This action signals the transmitter to re transmit the information after the channel has been reopened (initiated by the remote site, as always).
The transmitter, on the other hand, aborts a channel by sending a block with a particular bit combination (e   2 in BCBYTE; see Section E).
If either site aborts card reader (input) channel, RJS will discard the text of the last partially spooled job; the remote site should re transmit this job.
Note that repeating an entire stack will enter duplicate jobs into the system, but the second copy of a job will "flush" due to its duplicate job name.
If a printer or punch (output) channel is aborted, Central will re  transmit from the beginning of the current SYSOUT data set; the effect is the same as a RESTART command.[2]
If the operator input channel is aborted, the remote site must re  transmit the last  block .
Finally, the operator output channel has no abort condition defined.
Central will never send Channel Abort message on this channel; if the remote site closes its socket (socket b), Central will not re transmit, but simply cease sending messages until the channel is reopened.
Therefore a remote site can operate without an operator output channel; however we do not recommend this, as the user will then miss operator advisory messages such as a warning of an impending IPL.
Checking The nature of remote job entry service is such that a low rate of undetected errors is mandatory.
The IMP's use CRC's and sequence numbers over the communication lines, so the effective IMP IMP error rate should be negligible.
Although there is no checking provided for the IMP Host interface, it seems likely that these interfaces will either be reliable or fail catastrophically; it seems unlikely that "drop outs" or other random failures will occur.
Therefore only the following simple checks are provided: 1.
Each block will (at least initially) contain a fixed bit check pattern using both on and off states of each bit path in the 16 bit PDA interface at CCN.
It is anticipated that even this crude check on IMP Host transmission will be useful both during the initial checkout of hardware and software and also later if the interface becomes marginal.
However, either site can omit the check pattern if it sets a bit in the Block Control Byte (BCBYTE); see Section F. 2.
Each block contains a sequence number.
Again this is intended for initial checkout and to signal catastrophic hardware or software problems.
If the receiver detects an incorrect check pattern or block sequence number, he aborts the channel by closing the corresponding network connection; the remote site should then issue an RFC to re establish the network connection.
The sequence number of the first block after an RFC is 0.
The  numbers are never reset while the connection is open.
The Blockhead field consists of a Block Control Byte, a 32 bit check field CHECK, and a Device Byte.
Here BLKSEQ contains a 5 bit modulo 32 block sequence number b.
ERRORCONTROL is a 2 bit field with the following meanings:
e 0 :  Normal block.
Contains a (presumably valid) check field CHECK.
e 1 :  Block contains no check field CHECK.
e 2 :  Abort channel, initiated by transmitter.
Channels is not closed, transmission restarts on job related boundary.
This byte identifies a particular remote device, i.e., it identifies a stream.
DEVTYPE specifies the type of device, as follows:
t 1:  Output to remote operator console.
Input from remote operator console.
3:  Input from card reader.
DEVNO is a 3 bit integer which identifies the particular device type of type t at this remote site.
'00000101'BYTE ENDOFBLOCK '0'BYTE Record Format RECORD   DATA RECORD
The first record sent on a printer or punch output channel will be a JOBNAMERECORD, identifying the OS/360 jobname of the job which produced the following output.
This is the 8 character OS/360 jobname for the following job.
:BIT2   k:BIT4 DEVCNTRL specifies carriage control for a printer, so if the device is not a printer then DEVCNTRL should be '000000'.
d 1, k 1: Skip to top of new page after printing.
Immediately skip to top of new page.
This is a string of i consecutive blanks.
This is a string of i consecutive duplicates of TEXTBYTE.
This is an uncompressed string of j characters.
BYTE" represent bytes in both length and alignment.
H.  NOTES AND REFERENCES 1.
Martin, V.A. and Springer, T.W., "Implementation of A Remote Job Service", Technical Report TR2, Campus Computing Network, UCLA, Los Angeles, (undated).
The RJS operator commands and messages are described in detail in Reference 1.
We use the phrase "starting a session" rather than "logging on" because RJS has its own log on procedure, which is, we suppose, a fourth level protocol.
Note that NETRJS uses closing of connections as end of file signals.
FIGURE 1 ARPA Network Connections (Channels)
For a Standard Remote Site Under NETRJS
[This RFC was put into machine readable form for entry] [into the online RFC archives by Lorrie Shiota, 10/01]
