This memo is an official status report on the protocols used in the Internet community.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.
INTRODUCTION This RFC identifies the documents specifying the official protocols used in the Internet.
Comments indicate any revisions or changes planned.
To first order, the official protocols are those specified in the "DDN Protocol Handbook" (DPH), dated December 1985 (this is a three volume set with a total thickness of about 5 inches).
Older collections that include many of these  specifications are the "Internet Protocol Transition Workbook" (IPTW), dated March 1982; the "Internet Mail Protocols", dated November 1982; and the "Internet Telnet Protocols and Options", dated June 1983.
There is also a volume of protocol related information called the "Internet Protocol Implementers Guide" (IPIG) dated August 1982.
An even older collection is the "ARPANET Protocol Handbook" (APH) dated January 1978.
Nearly all the relevant material from these collections has been reproduced in the current DPH.
The following material is organized as a sketchy outline.
The entries are protocols (e.g., Transmission Control Protocol).
In each entry there are notes on status, specification, comments, other references, dependencies, and contact.
The STATUS is one of: required, recommended, elective, experimental, or none.
The SPECIFICATION identifies the protocol defining documents.
The COMMENTS describe any differences from the specification or problems with the protocol.
The OTHER REFERENCES identify documents that comment on or expand on the protocol.
The DEPENDENCIES indicate what other protocols are called upon by this protocol.
The CONTACT indicates a person who can answer questions about the protocol.
In particular, the status may be: required all hosts must implement the required protocol, recommended all hosts are encouraged to implement the recommended protocol, elective hosts may implement or not the elective protocol, experimental hosts should not implement the experimental protocol unless they are participating in the experiment and have coordinated their use of this protocol with the contact person, and none this is not a protocol.
For further information about protocols in general, please contact: Joyce K. Reynolds USC Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, California  90292
Phone: (213) 822 1511 Electronic mail: JKREYNOLDS@ISI.EDU
None SPECIFICATION:  IEN 48 (in DPH)
Gives an overview of the organization and principles of the Internet.
Could be revised and expanded.
Leiner, B., Cole R., Postel, J., and D. Mills, "The DARPA Protocol Suite", IEEE INFOCOM 85, Washington, D.C., March 1985.
Also in IEEE Communications Magazine, and as ISI/RS 85 153, March 1985.
Postel, J., "Internetwork Applications Using the DARPA Protocol Suite", IEEE INFOCOM 85, Washington, D.C., March 1985.
Also in IEEE Communications Magazine, and as ISI/RS 85 151, April 1985.
Padlipsky, M.A., "The Elements of Networking Style and other Essays and Animadversions on the Art of Intercomputer Networking", Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1985.
RFC 871 A Perspective on the ARPANET Reference Model DEPENDENCIES:
Required SPECIFICATION:  RFC 791 (in DPH)
This is the universal protocol of the Internet.
This datagram protocol provides the universal addressing of hosts in the Internet.
A few minor problems have been noted in this document.
The most serious is a bit of confusion in the route options.
The route options have a pointer that indicates which octet of the route is the next to be used.
The confusion is between the phrases "the pointer is relative to this option" and "the smallest legal value for the pointer is 4".
If you are confused, forget about the relative part, the pointer begins at 4.
The MIL STD description of source routing is wrong in some of the details.
Another important point is the alternate reassembly procedure suggested in RFC 815.
Some changes are in the works for the security option.
Note that ICMP is defined to be an integral part of IP.
You have not completed an implementation of IP if it does not include ICMP.
The subnet procedures defined in RFC 950 are now considered an essential part of the IP architecture and must be implemented by all hosts and gateways.
RFC 815 (in DPH) IP Datagram Reassembly Algorithms RFC 814 (in DPH) Names, Addresses, Ports, and Routes RFC 816
(in DPH) Fault Isolation and Recovery RFC 1011 Official Internet Protocols
May 1987 RFC 817 (in DPH) Modularity and Efficiency in Protocol Implementation MIL STD 1777 (in DPH)
Military Standard Internet Protocol RFC 963
Some Problems with the Specification of the Military Standard Internet Protocol
Required SPECIFICATION:  RFC 792 (in DPH)
The control messages and error reports that go with the Internet Protocol.
A few minor errors in the document have been noted.
Suggestions have been made for additional types of redirect message and additional destination unreachable messages.
Two additional ICMP message types are defined in RFC 950 "Internet Subnets", Address Mask Request (A1 17), and Address Mask Reply (A2 18).
Note that ICMP is defined to be an integral part of IP.
You have not completed an implementation of IP if it does not include ICMP.
This protocol specifies the extensions required of a host implementation of the Internet Protocol (IP) to support internetwork multicasting.
This specification supersedes that given in RFC 966, and constitutes a proposed protocol standard for IP multicasting in the Internet.
Reference RFC 966 for a discussion of the motivation and rationale behind the multicasting extension specified here.
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 768 (in DPH)
COMMENTS: Provides a datagram service to applications.
Adds port addressing to the IP services.
The only change noted for the UDP specification is a minor clarification that if in computing the checksum a padding octet is used for the computation it is not transmitted or counted in the length.
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 793 (in DPH)
COMMENTS: Provides reliable end to end data stream service.
Many comments and corrections have been received for the TCP specification document.
These are primarily document bugs rather than protocol bugs.
There are many minor corrections and clarifications needed in this section.
There are still some phrases in the document that give a "record mark" flavor to the push.
These should be further clarified.
The push is not a record mark.
Urgent:  Page 17 is wrong.
The urgent pointer points to the last octet of urgent data (not to the first octet of non urgent data).
Several comments have been received on difficulties with contacting listening servers.
There should be some discussion of implementation issues for servers, and some notes on alternative models of system and process organization for servers.
The maximum segment size option should be generalized and clarified.
It can be used to either increase or decrease the maximum segment size from the default.
The TCP Maximum Segment Size is the IP Maximum Datagram Size minus forty.
The default IP Maximum Datagram Size is 576.
The default TCP Maximum Segment Size is 536.
For further discussion, see RFC 879.
There have been questions about automatically closing idle connections.
Idle connections are ok, and should not be closed.
There are several cases where idle connections arise, for example, in Telnet when a user is thinking for a long time following a message from the server computer before his next input.
There is no TCP "probe" mechanism, and none is needed.
Queued Receive Data on Closing
:  There are several points where it is not clear from the description what to do about data received by the TCP but not yet passed to the user, particularly when the connection is being closed.
In general, the data is to be kept to give to the user if he does a RECV call.
The description says that segments that arrive out of order, that is, are not exactly the next segment to be processed, may be kept on hand.
It should also point out that there is a very large performance penalty for not doing so.
This is the time out started on an open or send call.
If this user time out occurs the user should be notified, but the connection should not be closed or the TCB deleted.
The user should explicitly ABORT the connection if he wants to give up.
RFC 813 (in DPH) Window and Acknowledgement Strategy in TCP RFC 814 (in DPH) Names, Addresses, Ports, and Routes RFC 816
(in DPH) Fault Isolation and Recovery RFC 817 (in DPH) Modularity and Efficiency in Protocol Implementation RFC 879 TCP
RFC 889 Internet Delay Experiments RFC 896 TCP/IP Congestion Control MIL STD 1778 (in DPH) Military Standard Transmission Control Protocol RFC 964
Some Problems with the Specification of the Military Standard Transmission Control Protocol Zhang, Lixia, "
Why TCP Timers Don't Work Well", Communications Architectures and Protocols, ACM SIGCOMM Proceedings,  Computer Communications Review, V.16, N.3, August 1986.
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  RFC 998 COMMENTS:
This is a revised RFC on the discussion of the Network Block Transfer (NETBLT) protocol.
NETBLT (NETwork BLock Transfer) is a transport level protocol intended for the rapid transfer of a large quantity of data between computers.
It provides a transfer that is reliable and flow controlled, and is designed to provide maximum throughput over a wide variety of networks.
Although NETBLT currently RFC 1011
This document is published for discussion and comment, and does not constitute a standard.
The proposal may change and certain parts of the protocol have not yet been specified; implementation of this document is therefore not advised.
OTHER REFERENCES:  RFC 969 DEPENDENCIES:
Transmission Control Protocol, User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Recommended for Gateways SPECIFICATION:  RFC 888, RFC 904 (in DPH)
, RFC 975, RFC 985 COMMENTS:
The protocol used between gateways of different administrations to exchange routing information.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
RFC 827, RFC 890 DEPENDENCIES:
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  RFC 823 (in DPH)
The gateway protocol now used in the core gateways.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 869 (in DPH)
This is a good tool for debugging protocol implementations in remotely located computers.
This protocol is used to monitor Internet gateways and the TACs.
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  RFC 908 (in DPH)
This protocol is designed to efficiently support the bulk transfer of data for such host monitoring and control applications as loading/dumping and remote debugging.
The protocol is intended to be simple to implement but still be efficient in environments where there may be long transmission delays and loss or non sequential delivery of message segments.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES:  Internet Protocol CONTACT:  CWelles@BBN.COM Internet Reliable Transaction Protocol
This protocol is a transport level host to host protocol designed for an internet environment.
While the issues discussed may not be directly relevant to the research problems of the Internet community, they may be interesting to a number of researchers and implementors.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  IEN 158 (in DPH)
A debugging protocol, allows debugger like access to remote systems.
This specification should be updated and reissued as an RFC.
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  IEN 90 (in DPH)
Defines a capability to combine several segments from different higher level protocols in one IP datagram.
No current experiment in progress.
There is some question as to the extent to which the sharing this protocol envisions can actually take place.
Also, there are some issues about the information captured in the multiplexing header being (a) insufficient, or (b) over specific.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  IEN 119 (in DPH)
A gateway resource allocation protocol designed for use in multihost real time applications.
The implementation of this protocol has evolved and may no longer be consistent with this specification.
The document should be updated and issued as an RFC.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
ISI Internal Memo COMMENTS: Defines the procedures for real time voice conferencing.
The specification is an ISI Internal Memo which should be updated and issued as an RFC.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES:  Internet Protocol, Stream Protocol CONTACT:
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 854 (in DPH)
The protocol for remote terminal access.
This has been revised since the IPTW.
RFC 764 in IPTW is now obsolete.
(in DPH) Telnet Protocol DEPENDENCIES:
Postel@ISI.EDU RFC 1011 Official Internet Protocols
General description of options:  RFC 855 (in DPH)
The DHP column indicates if the specification is included in the DDN Protocol Handbook.
The USE column of the table above indicates which options are in general use.
The Binary Transmission, Echo, Suppress Go Ahead, Status, RFC 1011 Official Internet Protocols
May 1987 Timing Mark, and Extended Options List options have been recently updated and reissued.
These are the most frequently implemented options.
The remaining options should be reviewed and the useful ones should be revised and reissued.
The others should be eliminated.
The following are recommended:  Binary Transmission, Echo,
Suppress Go Ahead, Status, Timing Mark, and Extended Options List.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 734 (in DPH
A special Telnet like protocol for display terminals.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 959 (in DPH)
The protocol for moving files between Internet hosts.
Provides for access control and negotiation of file parameters.
The following new optional commands are included in this edition of the specification:  Change to Parent Directory RFC 1011
, Structure Mount (SMNT), Store Unique (STOU), Remove Directory (RMD), Make Directory (MKD), Print Directory (PWD), and System (SYST).
Note that this specification is compatible with the previous edition (RFC 765).
A discrepancy has been found in the specification in the examples of Appendix II.
On page 63, a response code of 200 is shown as the response to a CWD command.
Under the list of Command Reply Sequences cited on page 50, CWD is shown to only accept a 250 response code.
Therefore, if one would interpret a CWD command as being excluded from the File System functional category, one may assume that the response code of 200 is correct, since CDUP as a special case of CWD does use 200.
RFC 678 (in DPH) Document File Format Standards MIL STD 1780 (in DPH)
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 783 (in IPTW)
A very simple file moving protocol, no access control is provided.
This is in use in several local networks.
Ambiguities in the interpretation of several of the transfer modes should be  clarified, and additional transfer modes could be defined.
Additional error codes could be defined to more clearly identify problems.
Note: The DPH contains IEN 133, which is an obsolete version of this protocol.
SFTP is a simple file transfer protocol.
It fills the need of people wanting a protocol that is more useful than TFTP but easier to implement (and less powerful) than FTP.
SFTP supports user access control, file transfers, directory listing, directory changing, file renaming and deleting.
SFTP can be implemented with any reliable 8 bit byte stream oriented protocol, this document describes its TCP specification.
SFTP uses only one TCP connection; whereas TFTP implements a connection over UDP, and FTP uses two TCP connections (one using the TELNET protocol).
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 821 (in DPH)
The procedure for transmitting computer mail between hosts.
This has been revised since the IPTW, it is in the "Internet Mail Protocols" volume of November 1982.
RFC 788 (in IPTW) is obsolete.
There have been many misunderstandings and errors in the early implementations.
Some documentation of these problems can be found in the file [C.ISI.EDU]<SMTP>MAIL.ERRORS.
Some minor differences between RFC 821 and RFC 822 should be resolved.
RFC 822 Mail Header Format Standards
This has been revised since the IPTW, it is in the "Internet Mail Protocols" volume of November 1982.
RFC 733 (in IPTW) is obsolete.
Further revision of RFC 822 is needed to correct some minor errors in the details of the specification.
RFC 822 is not included in the DPH (an accident, it should have been).
MIL STD 1781 (in DPH)
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
NNTP specifies a protocol for the distribution, inquiry, retrieval, and posting of news articles using a reliable stream based transmission of news among the Internet community.
NNTP is designed so that news articles are stored in a central database allowing a subscriber to select only those items he wishes to read.
Indexing, cross referencing, and expiration of aged messages are also provided.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  RFC 937 (in DPH)
The intent of the Post Office Protocol Version 2 (POP2) is to allow a user's workstation to access mail from a mailbox server.
It is expected that mail will be posted from the workstation to the mailbox server via the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP).
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
These documents define a proposed standard protocol to support NetBIOS services in a TCP/IP environment.
Both local network and internet operation are supported.
Various node types are defined to accomodate local and internet topologies and to allow operation with or without the use of IP broadcast RFC 1001 describes the NetBIOS over TCP protocols in a general manner, with emphasis on the underlying ideas and techniques.
RFC 1002 gives the detailed specifications of the NetBIOS over TCP packets, protocols, and defined constants and variables.
RFC 951 COMMENTS: This proposed protocol provides an IP/UDP bootstrap protocol which allows a diskless client machine to discover its own IP address, the address of a server host, and the name of a file to be loaded into memory and executed.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Internet Protocol, User Datagram Protocol CONTACT:
Croft@SUMEX AIM.STANFORD.EDU Loader Debugger Protocol
RFC 909 COMMENTS: Specifies a protocol for loading, dumping and debugging target machines from hosts in a network environment.
It is also designed to accommodate a variety of target CPU types.
It provides a powerful set of debugging services, while at the same time, it is structured so that a simple subset may be implemented in applications like boot loading where efficiency and space are at a premium.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES:  Reliable Data Protocol CONTACT:  Hinden@BBN.COM Resource Location Protocol
A resource location protocol for use in the Internet.
This protocol utilizes the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) which in turn calls on the Internet Protocol to deliver its datagrams.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 407 (in DPH)
The general protocol for submitting batch jobs and retrieving the results.
Some changes needed for use with TCP.
File Transfer Protocol, Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
A special protocol for submitting batch jobs and retrieving the results used with the UCLA IBM OS system.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 818 (in DPH) COMMENTS:
Provides special access to user Telnet on a remote system.
The protocol for vector graphics.
Very minor changes needed for use with TCP.
The DPH claims that this is RFC 493, but RFC 493 is actually a different earlier specification.
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 862 (in DPH)
Debugging protocol, sends back whatever you send it.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol
Debugging protocol, throws away whatever you send it.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 864 (in DPH)
Debugging protocol, sends you ASCII data.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol
Debugging protocol, sends you a short ASCII message.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol
This RFC specifies a standard for the Internet community.
Hosts and gateways on the Internet that choose to implement a remote statistics monitoring facility may use this protocol to send statistics data upon request to a monitoring center or debugging host.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 866 (in DPH)
Lists the currently active users.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 742 (in DPH)
Provides information on the current or most recent activity of a user.
Some extensions have been suggested.
Some changes are are needed for TCP.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Accesses the ARPANET Directory database.
Provides a way to find out about people, their addresses, phone numbers, organizations, and mailboxes.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
CSNET Mailbox Name Server Protocol
CS DN 2 (in DPH) COMMENTS: Provides access to the CSNET data base of users to give information about users names, affiliations, and mailboxes.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 881, RFC 882,
RFC 883 (in DPH) COMMENTS:
RFC 920 Domain Requirements RFC 921 Domain Name Implementation Schedule Revised RFC 973 Domain System Changes and Observations RFC 974 Mail Routing and the Domain System DEPENDENCIES:
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol
Accesses the Registered Internet Hosts database (HOSTS.TXT).
Provides a way to find out about a host in the Internet, its Internet Address, and the protocols it implements.
RFC 952 Host Table Specification DEPENDENCIES:
Experimental SPECIFICATION:  IEN 116 (in DPH)
COMMENTS: Provides machine oriented procedure for translating a host name to an Internet Address.
This specification has significant problems:  1)
The name syntax is out of date.
The protocol details are ambiguous, in particular, the length octet either does or doesn't include itself and the op code.
The extensions are not supported by any known implementation.
This protocol is now abandoned in favor of the DOMAIN protocol.
Further implementations of this protocol are not advised.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 867 (in DPH)
Provides the day and time in ASCII character string.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol
A proposed protocol for synchronizing a set of network clocks using a set of distributed clients and servers.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
OTHER REFERENCES:  RFC 778, RFC 891, RFC 956, and RFC 957.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 868 (in DPH)
COMMENTS: Provides the time as the number of seconds from a specified reference time.
Transmission Control Protocol or User Datagram Protocol
RFC 778 COMMENTS: Provides a mechanism for keeping synchronized clocks.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
This server provides a means to determine the identity of a user of a particular TCP connection.
Given a TCP port number pair, it returns a character string which identifies the owner of that connection on the server's system.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
OTHER REFERENCES:  Supercedes RFC 912 DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
RFC 1011 Official Internet Protocols
This RFC focuses its discussion on authentication problems in the Internet and possible methods of solution.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
This is an experimental multimedia mail transfer protocol.
The implementation is called a Message Processing Module or MPM.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
RFC 767 Structured Document Formats DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 569 (in DPH)
COMMENTS: Describes a simple line editor which could be provided by every Internet host.
DEPENDENCIES: CONTACT:  Postel@ISI.EDU RFC 1011 Official Internet Protocols
May 1987 APPENDICES Internet Numbers    STATUS:
RFC 997 COMMENTS: Describes the fields of network numbers and autonomous system numbers that are assigned specific values for actual use, and lists the currently assigned values.
Issued March 1987, replaces RFC 990, RFC 790 in IPTW, and RFC 960.
Describes the fields of various protocols that are assigned specific values for actual use, and lists the currently assigned values.
Issued May 1987, replaces RFC 990, RFC 790 in IPTW, and RFC 960.
Elective SPECIFICATION:  RFC 794 (in DPH)
Describes how to do pre emption of TCP connections.
None SPECIFICATION:  RFC 795 (in DPH)
Describes the mapping of the IP type of service field onto the parameters of some specific networks.
Out of date, needs revision.
None SPECIFICATION:  RFC 796 (in DPH)
Describes the mapping between Internet Addresses and the addresses of some specific networks.
Out of date, needs revision.
OTHER REFERENCES: CONTACT:  Postel@ISI.EDU RFC 1011 Official Internet Protocols
May 1987 Document Formats    STATUS:
None SPECIFICATION:  RFC 678 (in DPH)
Describes standard format rules for several types of documents.
OTHER REFERENCES: CONTACT:  Postel@ISI.EDU Equations Representation
None SPECIFICATION:  RFC 1003 COMMENTS:
Identifies and explores issues in defining a standard for the exchange of mathematical equations.
OTHER REFERENCES: CONTACT:  Katz@ISI.EDU Bitmap Formats
None SPECIFICATION:  RFC 797 (in DPH)
COMMENTS: Describes a standard format for bitmap data.
COMMENTS: Describes a standard format for facsimile data.
Postel@ISI.EDU Host Front End Protocol
RFC 929 COMMENTS: Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
Padlipsky@ISI.EDU Internet Protocol on ARPANET
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  BBN Report 1822
Describes the interface between a Host and an IMP, and by implication the transmission of IP Datagrams over the ARPANET.
RFC 851, RFC 852, RFC 878 (in DPH), RFC 979, RFC 1005 CONTACT:
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 907 (in DPH)
COMMENTS: Describes a standard for the transmission of IP Datagrams over the Wideband Net.
This protocol specifies the network access level communication between an arbitrary computer, called a host, and a packet switched satellite network, e.g., SATNET or WBNET.
Note:  Implementations of HAP should be performed in coordination with satellite network development and operations personnel.
OTHER REFERENCES: CONTACT:  Blumenthal@BBN.COM Internet Protocol on Wideband Network
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 907  (in DPH)
COMMENTS: Describes a standard for the transmission of IP Datagrams over the WBNET.
This protocol specifies the network access level communication between an arbitrary computer, called a host, and a packet switched satellite network, e.g., SATNET or WBNET.
Note:  Implementations of HAP should be performed in coordination with satellite network development and operations personnel.
Recommended SPECIFICATION:  RFC 877 (in DPH)
COMMENTS: Describes a standard for the transmission of IP Datagrams over Public Data Networks.
RFC 891 (in DPH) COMMENTS:
RFC 894 (in DPH) COMMENTS:
RFC 895 (in DPH) COMMENTS: OTHER REFERENCES:
CONTACT:  Postel@ISI.EDU Internet Protocol on IEEE 802
Recommended SPECIFICATION: see comments COMMENTS:
At an ad hoc special session on "IEEE 802 Networks and ARP" held during the TCP Vendors Workshop (August 1986), an approach to a consistent way to sent DOD IP datagrams and other IP related protocols on 802 networks was developed.
Due to some evolution of the IEEE 802.2 standards and the need to provide for a standard way to do additional DOD IP related protocols (such as Address Resolution Protocol (ARP)) on IEEE 802 networks, the following new policy is established, which will replace the current policy (see RFC 990 section on IEEE 802 Numbers of Interest, and RFC 948).
The policy is for DDN and Internet community to use IEEE 802.2 encapsulation on 802.3, 802.4, and 802.5 networks by using the SNAP with an organization code indicating that the following 16 bits specify the Ethertype code (where IP   2048 (0800 hex), see RFC 1010  section on Ethernet Numbers of Interest).
The total length of the SAP Header and the SNAP header is 8 octets, making the 802.2 protocol overhead come out on a nice boundary.
The IEEE like to talk about things in bit transmission order and specifies this value as 01010101.
In big endian order, as used in Internet specifications, this becomes 10101010 binary, or AA hex, or 170 decimal.
The method described in RFC 948 (in DPH) is no longer to be used.
This is a very important feature and must be included in all IP implementations.
Specifies procedures for the use of subnets, which are logical sub sections of a single Internet network.
OTHER REFERENCES:  RFC 940, RFC 917, RFC 925, RFC 932, RFC 936,
RFC 922 DEPENDENCIES: CONTACT:  Mogul@SU SCORE.STANFORD.EDU
May 1987 Address Resolution Protocol
RFC 826  (IN DPH) COMMENTS:
This is a procedure for finding the network hardware address corresponding to an Internet Address.
This is a procedure for workstations to dynamically find their protocol address (e.g., their Internet Address), when they only only know their hardware address (e.g., their attached physical network address).
Multi LAN Address Resolution Protocol
Discussion of the various problems and potential solutions of "transparent subnets" in a multi LAN environment.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
A proposed protocol of simple rules for broadcasting Internet datagrams on local networks that support broadcast, for addressing broadcasts, and for how gateways should handle them.
Recommended in the sense of "if you do broadcasting at all then do it this way".
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
RFC 922 DEPENDENCIES: CONTACT: Mogul@SU SCORE.STANFORD.EDU Broadcasting Internet Datagrams with Subnets
A proposed protocol of simple rules for broadcasting Internet datagrams on local networks that support broadcast, for addressing broadcasts, and for how gateways should handle them.
Recommended in the sense of "if you do broadcasting with subnets at all then do it this way".
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
This paper specifies a protocol which allows two programs to reliably communicate over a communication link.
It ensures that the data entering one end of the link if received arrives at the other end intact and unaltered.
This proposed protocol is designed to operate over a full duplex point to point connection.
It contains some features which tailor it to the RS 232 links now in current use.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: Transmission Control Protocol CONTACT:
This paper discusses a Thinwire Protocol for connecting personal computers to the Internet.
It primarily focuses on the particular problems in the Internet of low speed network interconnection with personal computers, and possible methods of solution.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
The International Standards Organization (ISO) and the International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (CCITT) are defining a set of protocols that may be of interest to the Internet community.
Some of these have been published as RFCs for information purposes.
This section lists these protocols.
End System to Intermediate System Routing Exchange Protocol    STATUS:
This protocol is one of a set of International Standards produced to facilitate the interconnection of open systems.
The set of standards covers the services and protocols required to achieve such interconnection.
This protocol is positioned with respect to other related standards by the layers defined in the Reference Model for Open Systems Interconnection (ISO 7498) and by the structure defined in the Internal Organization of the Network Layer (DIS 8648).
In particular, it is a protocol of the Network Layer.
This protocol permits End Systems and Intermediate Systems to exchange configuration and routing information to facilitate the operation of the routing and relaying functions of the Network Layer.
This Protocol Standard is one of a set of International Standards produced to facilitate the interconnection of open systems.
The set of standards covers the services and protocols required to achieve such interconnection.
In particular, it is a protocol of the Network Layer.
This Protocol may be used between network entities in end systems or in Network Layer relay systems (or both).
It provides the Connectionless mode Network Service as defined in Addendum 1 to the Network Service Definition Covering Connectionless mode Transmission (ISO 8348/AD1).
ANSI Internet IP Addressing in ISO IP    STATUS:
This RFC suggests a method to allow the existing IP addressing, including the IP protocol field, to be used for the ISO Connectionless Network Protocol (CLNP).
This is a draft solution to one of the problems inherent in the use of "ISO grams" in the DoD Internet.
Related issues will be discussed in subsequent RFCs.
This RFC suggests a proposed protocol for the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions for improvements.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
This Addendum to the Network Service Definition Standard, ISO 8348, defines the abstract syntax and semantics of the Network Address (Network Service Access Point Address).
The Network Address defined in this Addendum is the address that appears in the primitives of the connection mode Network Service as the calling address, called address, and responding address parameters, and in the primitives of the connectionless mode Network  Service  as  the source address and destination address parameters.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
DEPENDENCIES: CONTACT: ISO Transport Protocol Specification
This is the current specification of the ISO Transport Protocol.
This document is the text of ISO/TC97/SC16/N1576 as corrected by ISO/TC97/SC16/N1695.
This is the specification currently being voted on in ISO as a Draft International Standard (DIS).
ISO Transport Services on Top of the TCP    STATUS:
This memo describes a proposed protocol standard for the Internet community.
The CCITT and the ISO have defined various session, presentation, and application recommendations which have been adopted by the international community and numerous vendors.
To the largest extent possible, it is desirable to offer these higher level services directly to the Internet, without disrupting existing facilities.
This permits users to develop expertise with ISO and CCITT applications which previously were not available in the Internet.
The intention is that hosts within the Internet that choose to implement ISO TSAP services on top of the TCP be expected to adopt and implement this standard.
Suggestions for improvement are encouraged.
Please discuss any plans for implementation or use of this protocol with the contact.
OTHER REFERENCES:  RFC 983 DEPENDENCIES: CONTACT: DCass@NRTC.NORTHROP.COM Mapping Between X.400 and RFC 822
The X.400 series of protocols have been defined by CCITT to provide an Interpersonal Messaging Service (IPMS), making use of a store and forward Message Transfer Service.
It is expected that this standard will be implemented very widely.
This document describes a set of mappings which will enable interworking between systems operating the X.400 protocols and systems using RFC 822 mail protocol or protocols derived from RFC 822.
