Abstract This document describes the encoding used in electronic mail [RFC822] for transferring Hebrew.
The standard devised makes use of MIME [RFC1521] and ISO 8859 8.
Description All Hebrew text when transferred via e mail must first be translated into ISO 8859 8, and then encoded using either Quoted Printable (preferable) or Base64, as defined in MIME.
250 Note: All values are in decimal ASCII except for the EBCDIC column which is in hexadecimal.
ISO 8859 8 8 bit ASCII is also known as IBM Codepage 862.
The default directionality of the text is visual.
This means that the Hebrew text is encoded from left to right (even though Hebrew text is entered right to left) and is transmitted from left to right via the standard MIME mechanisms.
Other methods to control directionality are supported and are covered in the complementary RFC 1556, "Handling of Bi directional Texts in MIME".
All discussion regarding Hebrew in email, as well as discussions of Hebrew in other TCP/IP protocols, is discussed in the ilan  h@vm.tau.ac.il list.
To subscribe send mail to listserv@vm.tau.ac.il with one line of text as follows: subscribe ilan h firstname lastname MIME Considerations Mail that is sent that contains Hebrew must contain the following minimum amount of MIME headers:
MIME Version: 1.0 Content type: text/plain
; charset ISO 8859 8 Content transfer encoding:
Users should also realize that not all MIME implementations handle email quoting properly, so quoting email that contains Hebrew text may lead to problems.
In the future, when all email systems implement fully transparent 8  bit email as defined in RFC 1425 and RFC 1426
this standard will become partially obsolete.
The "Content type:" field will still be necessary, as well as directionality (which might be implicit for 8BIT, but is something for future discussion),  but the "Content  transfer encoding" will be altered to use 8BIT rather than Base64 or Quoted Printable.
It is recommended, although not required, to support Hebrew encoding in mail headers as specified in RFC 1522.
Specifically, the Q  encoding format is to be the default method used for encoding Hebrew in Internet mail headers and not the B encoding method.
Caveats Within Israel there are in excess of 40 Listserv lists which will now start using Hebrew for part of their conversations.
Normally, Listserv will deliver mail from a distribution list with a "shortened" header, one that does not include the extra MIME headers.
This will cause the MIME encoding to be left intact and the user agent decoding software will not be able to interpret the mail.
Each user is able to customize how Listserv delivers mail.
For lists that contain Hebrew, users should send mail to Listserv with the following command: set listname full where listname is the name of the list which the user wants full, unabridged headers to appear.
This will update their private entry and all subsequent mail from that list will be with full RFC822 headers, including MIME headers.
In addition, Listserv usually maintains automatic archives of all postings to a list.
These archives, contained in the file "listname LOGyymm", do not contain the MIME headers, so all encoding information will be lost.
This is a limitation of the Listserv software.
Example Below is a short example of Quoted Printable encoded Hebrew email:
MIME Version: 1.0 Content Type:
; charset ISO 8859 8 Content Transfer Encoding:
EC E0 F8 F9 E9  F5   F8
E0 EE  ED E5 EC
F7 F0 E4 Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
