Abstract This document specifies the manner for transmitting IPv4 datagrams over an ATM data link, both in a default manner and in the presence of flow labelling via Ipsilon Flow Management Protocol [IFMP].
This document specifies the manner for transmitting IPv4 datagrams over an ATM data link, both in a default manner and in the presence of flow labelling via Ipsilon Flow Management Protocol [IFMP].
ATM specific functions such as OAM cells, the CLP bit, and ABR RM cells are not used.
There are no reserved VCIs other than VPI   0,
VCI   0, which indicates an unassigned cell; and VPI   0, VCI   15, which is used for the default encapsulation.
IFMP messages must be sent using the default encapsulation.
Labels Labels, as carried by IFMP, are realized on an ATM data link as specific VPI/VCIs.
If the link cannot support a full 16 bit VCI the unused bits of the VCI must be the most significant bits and they must be set to zero.
The next 12 higher order bits of the label correspond to the VPI, with the least significant of these bits corresponding to the least significant bit of the VPI.
If the link cannot support a full 12 bit VPI, then the unused bits of the VPI must be the most significant bits and they must be set to zero.
The most significant four bits of the label are reserved.
They should be set to zero by the sender and ignored by the receiver.
The default encapsulation for IPv4 packets on ATM data links is the LLC/SNAP encapsulation specified in section 4.1 "LLC encapsulation for routed protocols" of RFC 1483 [RFC1483].
Such frames begin with the octets
0x00 0x08 0x00 (the LLC/SNAP header for IPv4).
SNAP (0x00 00 00 08 00)
Frames using the default encapsulation are sent to: VPI   0,
All IPv4 frames using Flow Type 0 are encapsulated within the payload of an AAL 5 CPCS PDU.
This is the null encapsulation of section 5.1 "VC based multiplexing of routed protocols" from RFC 1483
There is no LLC/SNAP header.
The first octet of the frame corresponds to the first octet of the IPv4 datagram (i.e., the octet that contains the IP version number (4) and Internet Header Length (IHL) ).
Frames using Flow Type 0 encapsulation are sent to the VPI/VCI specified in the Label field of the corresponding IFMP Flow Type 0 Redirect message element [IFMP].
All IPv4 frames using Flow Type 1 are encapsulated directly in the payload of an AAL 5 CPCS PDU.
This is the null encapsulation of section 5.1 "VC based multiplexing of routed protocols" from RFC 1483
There is no LLC/SNAP header.
Also, the following fields of the IP header are not transmitted: Version, Internet Header Length (IHL), Type of Service (TOS), Time to Live (TTL), Protocol, Source Address, and Destination Address.
In addition, the first 4 octets immediately following the IP header (as determined by the IHL field) are not transmitted.
(These 4 octets correspond to the source and destination ports for TCP and UDP datagrams.)
The value of the Total Length field is not changed; it remains the total length of the IP datagram before the above fields were removed.
The transmitted value of the Checksum field is the checksum value that would have been computed for the entire IP header if the TTL field had been set to zero (i.e., the actual value of the TTL field is "subtracted", using one's complement arithmetic, from the Checksum before transmission).
Frames using Flow Type 1 encapsulation are sent to the VPI/VCI specified in the Label field of the corresponding IFMP Flow Type 1 redirect message element [IFMP].
All IPv4 frames using Flow Type 2 are encapsulated directly in the payload of an AAL 5 CPCS PDU.
This is the null encapsulation of section 5.1 "VC based multiplexing of routed protocols" from RFC 1483
There is no LLC/SNAP header.
Also, the following fields of the IP header are not transmitted: Version, Internet Header Length (IHL), Time to Live (TTL), Source Address, and Destination Address.
The first 4 octets immediately following the IP header (as determined by the IHL field) are transmitted.
(These 4 octets correspond to the source and destination ports for TCP and UDP datagrams.)
The value of the Total Length field is not changed; it remains the total length of the IP datagram before the above fields were removed.
The transmitted value of the Checksum field is the checksum value that would have been computed for the entire IP header if the TTL field had been set to zero (i.e., the actual value of the TTL field is "subtracted", using one's complement arithmetic, from the Checksum before transmission).
The Reserved fields are not used and should be set to zero by the sender and ignored by the receiver.
The MTU of the IPv4 datagram using Flow Type 2 encapsulation is 1492 octets (1500 octets minus the 8 octets specified above).
Frames using Flow Type 2 encapsulation are sent to the VPI/VCI specified in the Label field of the corresponding IFMP Flow Type 2 redirect message element [IFMP].
SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS Security issues are not discussed in this document.
846 4604 Ipsilon Networks, Inc.
Phone:  1 (415) 846 4605 Ipsilon Networks, Inc.
Ipsilon Networks, Inc. is located at: 2191 East Bayshore Road Suite 100 Palo Alto,
CA 94303 USA Sprint is located at: Sprint Sprint Technology Services Long Distance Division 9300 Metcalf Avenue Mailstop KSOPKB0802 Overland Park, KS 66212
