Abstract This document provides supporting documentation to advance the Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse Mode (PIM SM) routing protocol from IETF Experimental status to Proposed Standard.
This analysis provides supporting documentation to advance the Protocol Independent Multicast Sparse Mode (PIM SM) routing protocol from the IETF Experimental status to Proposed Standard.
PIM SM was first published as RFC 2117 [RFC2117] in 1997 and then again as RFC 2362
The protocol was classified as Experimental in both of these documents.
The PIM SM protocol specification was then rewritten in whole in order to more fully specify the protocol.
It is this new specification that is to be advanced to Proposed Standard.
RFC 1264 Requirements Section 4.0 of RFC 1264
[RFC1264] describes the requirements for routing protocols to advance to Proposed Standard.
Each requirement is listed below along with an explanation of how the requirement has been satisfied.
Documents Specifying the Protocol and Its Usage
The authors of the new PIM SM specification [RFC4601] have taken considerable care to fully specify the protocol operation.
It removes all known ambiguities and tries to normalize corner cases that existed in the previous specification.
It has been used to provide several interoperable implementations by developers that were not authors of the specification.
These implementations will be described below.
Management Information Base A Management Information Base for PIM is currently specified in RFC 2934 [RFC2934].
This MIB has many implementations and has been used by network management applications for several years.
Updates to this MIB to support IPv6 and other improvements based on operation experience are in progress in the PIM Working Group of the IETF.
The new PIM Sparse Mode protocol specification contains an extensive security section explaining its security features and limitations.
Data integrity protection and groupwise data origin authentication is provided for PIM protocol messages.
There are at least 4 known independent implementations of the new protocol specification, and there are over 6 independent implementations of a previous version (RFC 2362) of the specification.
The new specification was carefully written to be backward compatible with the old specification allowing implementations compliant with RFC 2362 to also be compliant with the new specification.
The 4 implementations of the new version are described below.
The XORP project [XORP] has an open source implementation of PIM SM v2 as specified in RFC 4601.
It was written by Pavlin Radoslavov <pavlin@icir.org> and has been available to the public since December 2002.
Pavlin is not an author of the protocol specification.
It does not use any other existing code as a base.
Cisco IOS/IOX Cisco Systems, Inc., has written an implementation of the new protocol specification that has been deployed in production routers.
There exists an IOS implementation for IPv6 only.
There exists an IOX implementation for both IPv4 and IPv6.
This code was initially written by Isidor Kouvelas
It does not depend on any existing code base.
Isidor is a co author of the protocol specification.
Infosys Technologies, Ltd. (www.infosys.com), has developed a limited shared tree implementation of the new Sparse Mode specification including PIM Hello messages, DR election, PIM join/prune messages, join suppression, and prune override.
> and is used in commercial products.
Bharat is not an author of the protocol specification.
An implementation was written from scratch at Procket Networks by Dino Farinacci <dino@cisco.com
This implementation is now owned by Cisco Systems, Inc.
Dino is not an author of the new protocol specification.
Cisco The Cisco implementation has undergone extensive laboratory testing as well as testing in production deployments.
It is found to interoperate with implementations of earlier versions of the PIM Sparse Mode protocol specification.
The XORP PIM SM implementation has been thoughtfully tested internally by the XORP project.
The emphasis during testing has been on correctness.
In a typical setup, a PIM SM router's behavior is tested by connecting it to external packet generators and observers.
The packet generators are used to generate messages such as IGMP and PIM SM control packets, and multicast data packets.
The packet observers are used to observe the PIM SM control packets generated by the PIM SM router under test, and to observe the data packets that may be forwarded by that router.
In addition, the router's command  line interface has been used to observe its internal state during some of the tests.
The test scenarios have been designed to follow the protocol specification closely (e.g., a separate test has been created for each event in the various protocol state machines, etc).
All test scenarios are described in detail in the XORP PIM SM Test Suite [XORP TEST].
The major tested features are: 1.
2.  PIM Hello messages exchange, PIM router neighbor discovery, option exchange, and DR election.
PIM Register messages transmission and reception, PIM Register state machine, and multicast data packets encapsulation and decapsulation.
4.  Transmission and reception of PIM Join/Prune messages and upstream and downstream protocol state machines.
Transmission and reception of PIM Assert messages and the per  interface ( ,G) and
PIM Bootstrap mechanism: transmission, reception, and forwarding of PIM Bootstrap messages (BSMs), transmission and reception of PIM Cand RP Adv messages, candidate and non candidate Bootstrap Router (BSR) state machines, creating the RP Set at the BSR, receiving and using the RP Set, and semantic fragmentation of BSMs.
In the final tests, the tested router behaved as specified in the PIM SM protocol specification.
All issues found in the protocol specification itself have been corrected in earlier versions of the document.
The Procket Networks implementation was deployed in many research and service provider networks and showed interoperability with new and old Cisco Systems implementations as well as Juniper Networks implementations.
Suitability PIM Sparse Mode is a protocol for efficiently routing multicast groups that may span wide area (and inter domain) Internets.
PIM uses the underlying unicast routing to provide reverse path information for multicast tree building, but it is not dependent on any particular unicast routing protocol.
Authentication Mechanisms PIM specifies the use of the IP security (IPsec) authentication header (AH) to provide data integrity protection and groupwise data origin authentication of protocol messages.
The specific AH authentication algorithm and parameters, including the choice of authentication algorithm and the choice of key, are configured by the network administrator.
The threats associated with receiving forged PIM messages are outlined in the security considerations section of the protocol specification.
No considerations apply to a requirements analysis about a routing protocol, only to a specification for that routing protocol.
