Abstract This document requires that the IETF never publish any IETF Stream RFCs without IETF rough consensus.
Introduction IETF procedures, as defined by [RFC2026], allow for Informational or Experimental RFCs to be published without IETF rough consensus.
For context, it should be remembered that this RFC predates the separation of the various streams (e.g., IRTF, IAB, and Independent.)
When it was written, there were only "RFCs".
As a consequence, the IESG was permitted to approve an Internet Draft for publication as an RFC without IETF rough consensus.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
The IETF MUST NOT publish RFCs on the IETF Stream without establishing IETF rough consensus for publication.
The IETF procedures prior to publication of this BCP permitted such informational or experimental publication without IETF rough consensus.
In 2007, the IESG issued a statement saying that no document will be issued without first conducting an IETF Last Call [IESG STATE AD].
While this apparently improved the situation, when looking more closely, it made it worse.
Rather than publishing documents without verifying that there is rough consensus, as the wording in [RFC2026] suggests, this had the IESG explicitly publishing documents on the IETF Stream that have failed to achieve rough consensus.
One could argue that there is a need for publishing some documents that the community cannot agree on.
However, we have an explicit path for such publication, namely the Independent Stream.
Or, for research documents, the IRTF Stream, which explicitly publishes minority opinion Informational RFCs.
This document has no IANA actions.
This document introduces no new security considerations.
It is a process document about changes to the rules for certain corner cases in publishing IETF Stream RFCs.
However, this procedure will prevent publication of IETF Stream documents that have not reached rough consensus about their security aspects, thus potentially improving security aspects of IETF Stream documents.
