Abstract This document specifies methods of using the Arcfour cipher in the Secure Shell (SSH) protocol that mitigate the weakness of the cipher's key scheduling algorithm.
[RFC4251] is a secure remote login protocol.
It allows for the use of an extensible variety of symmetric cipher algorithms to provide confidentiality for data in transit.
One of the algorithms specified in the base protocol is "arcfour", which specifies the use of Arcfour (also known as RC4), a fast stream cipher.
As [RFC4253] says, though, "Arcfour (and RC4) has problems with weak keys, and should be used with caution.
These problems are described in more detail in [MANTIN01], along with a recommendation to discard the first 1536 bytes of keystream so as to ensure that the cipher's internal state is thoroughly mixed.
This document specifies new cipher algorithms for SSH that follow this recommendation.
Conventions Used in this Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Applicability Statement Implementations of Arcfour are typically slightly faster and much smaller than those of any other encryption algorithm currently defined for SSH.
This must be balanced, though, against the known security problems with Arcfour described in Section 5.
In most cases, where speed and code size are not critical issues, the algorithms specified by [RFC4344] should be used instead.
The "arcfour128" algorithm is the RC4 cipher, as described in [SCHNEIER], using a 128 bit key.
The first 1536 bytes of keystream generated by the cipher MUST be discarded, and the first byte of the first encrypted packet MUST be encrypted using the 1537th byte of keystream.
The "arcfour256" algorithm is the same, but uses a 256 bit key.
The security considerations in [RFC4251] apply.
The discarded bytes of keystream MUST be kept secret and MUST NOT be transmitted over the network.
The contents of these bytes could reveal information about the key.
There are two classes of attack on Arcfour described in [MIRONOV].
Strong distinguishers distinguish an Arcfour keystream from randomness at the start of the stream and are defended against by the algorithm defined in this document.
Weak distinguishers can operate on any part of the keystream, and the best ones, described in [FMcG] and [MANTIN05], can use data from multiple, different keystreams.
A consequence of this is that encrypting the same data (for instance, a password) sufficiently many times in separate Arcfour keystreams can be sufficient to leak information about it to an adversary.
It is thus RECOMMENDED that Arcfour (either in the form described here or that described in [RFC4251]) not be used for high volume password  authenticated connections.
The IANA has assigned the Encryption Algorithm Names "arcfour128" and "arcfour256" in accordance with [RFC4250].
Trademark Notice "RC4" and "SSH" are registered trademarks in the United States.
