Abstract This document defines a new Abuse Reporting Format (ARF) feedback report type value: "not spam".
It can be used to report an email message that was mistakenly marked as spam.
[RFC5965], an Abuse Reporting Format (ARF) is defined for reporting email abuse.
Currently, two feedback report types are defined that are related to the spam problem and that can be used to report abusive or fraudulent email messages:  abuse: indicates unsolicited email or some other kind of email abuse.
fraud: indicates some kind of fraud or phishing activity.
This specification defines a new feedback report type: "not spam".
It can be used to report a message that was mistakenly marked as spam.
In some cases, the email client receives an email message that was incorrectly tagged as spam, perhaps by the email system, or accidentally by the user.
The email client accepts the end user's "not spam" report instruction, retrieves information related to the message, and reports this email as not spam to the email operator.
When the email operator receives the report, it can determine what action is appropriate for the particular message and user.
(The requirement for a not spam report type is from the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA)
Requirement Document [OMA SpamRep RD].)
For example, in response to a "not spam" report, the email system can remove the spam tag or otherwise reclassify the message, possibly preventing similar email for this user from being marked as spam in the future.
The report can be used to adjust the training of an automated classifier.
After processing the report, the email operator might send a notification to the email client about the processing result (for example, by moving the message from one mailbox to another, such as from "Junk" to "Inbox").
In most cases, "not spam" reports will probably not be taken on their own, but will be considered along with other information, analysis of the message, etc.
Because different users have different needs and different views of what constitutes spam, reports from one user might or might not be applicable to others.
And because users might sometimes press a "report not spam" button accidentally, immediate strong action, such as marking all similar messages as "good" based on a single report, is probably not the right approach.
Recipients of "not spam" reports need to consider what's right in their environments.
There are anti spam systems that use (non standard) "not spam" feedback today.
All of them take the reports and mix them with other spam reports and other data, using their own algorithms, to determine appropriate action.
In no case do the existing systems use a "not spam" report as an immediate, automatic override.
The feedback types "abuse" and "not spam" can be taken as opposites.
A mistaken "not spam" report could be countermanded by a subsequent "abuse" report from the same user, and an operator could consider collected reports of "abuse" and "not spam" in making future assessments.
Feedback Report Type: not spam
This document defines a new feedback report type, "not spam", which extends the Email Feedback Reports specification [RFC5965].
In the first MIME part of the feedback report message, the end user or the email client can add information to indicate why the message is not considered as spam   for example, because the originator or its domain is well known.
In the example, Joe, a pharmaceuticals sales representative, has received a message about discount pharmaceuticals.
Because that is a frequent subject of spam email, the message has been marked as spam   incorrectly, in this case.
" part) for presentation here.
Note that the message has been signed using DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
[RFC6376]   a good security practice as suggested in Section 8.2 of RFC 5965
DKIM Signature: v 1; a rsa sha256; s abuse; d example.com; c simple/simple
; q dns/txt; i abusedesk@example.com;
Content Type; bh iF4dMNYs/KepE0HuwfukJCDyjkduUzZFiaHqO9DMIPU ; b e BF8DCHFGqCp7/pExleNz7pVaLEoT
Thu, 8 Mar 2005 17:40:36 EDT Subject:
FW: Discount on pharmaceuticals To: <abuse@example.net>
MIME Version: 1.0 Content Type: multipart/report; report type feedback report; boundary "part1 13d.2e68ed54 boundary"  part1 13d.2e68ed54
text/plain; charset "US ASCII" Content Transfer Encoding
: 7bit This is an email abuse report for an email message received from IP 192.0.2.1 on Thu, 8 Mar 2005 14:00:00 EDT.
For more information about this format please see http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5965 Comment: I sell pharmaceuticals, so this is not spam for me.
message/feedback report Feedback Type: not spam User Agent:
boundary Content Type: message/rfc822 Content Disposition:
inline Received: from mailserver.example.net (mailserver.example.net [192.0.2.1]) by example.com with ESMTP i
M63d4137594e46; Thu, 08 Mar 2005 14:00:00  0400
Discount on pharmaceuticals MIME Version: 1.0 Content type: text/plain Message ID:
I got a lead on a source for discounts on pharmaceuticals, and I thought you might be interested.
Example 1: not spam Report 4.
All of the security considerations from the Email Feedback Reports specification [RFC5965] are inherited here.
In addition, the Email Feedback Reports Applicability Statement [MARF AS] contains important information about trust relationships and other security  and integrity related aspects of accepting abuse feedback.
In particular, not spam reports will likely be used in an attack on a filtering system, reporting true spam as "not spam".
Even in absence of malice, some not spam reports might be made in error, or will only apply to the user sending the report.
Operators need to be careful in trusting such reports, beyond their applicability to the specific user in question.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the newly defined feedback type name: "not spam", according to the instructions in Section 7.3 of the base specification [RFC5965].
The following has been added to the "Feedback Report Type Values" registry:
:  Indicates that the entity providing the report does not consider the message to be spam.
This may be used to correct a message that was incorrectly tagged or categorized as spam.
