Abstract Mobile IPv6 bootstrapping can be categorized into two primary scenarios: the split scenario and the integrated scenario.
In the split scenario, the mobile node's mobility service is authorized by a different service authorizer than the network access authorizer.
In the integrated scenario, the mobile node's mobility service is authorized by the same service authorizer as the network access service authorizer.
This document defines a method for home agent information discovery for the integrated scenario.
The Mobile IPv6 protocol [RFC6275] requires the mobile node to have the following information:  the Home Address (HoA),  the home agent address, and  the cryptographic materials for establishing an IPsec security association with the home agent.
The cryptographic materials need to be established prior to initiating the registration process.
The mechanism via which the mobile node obtains this information is called "Mobile IPv6 bootstrapping".
In order to allow a flexible deployment model for Mobile IPv6, it is desirable to define a bootstrapping mechanism for the mobile node to acquire these parameters dynamically.
[RFC4640] describes the problem statement for Mobile IPv6 bootstrapping.
It also defines the bootstrapping scenarios based on the relationship between the entity that authenticates and authorizes the mobile node for network access (i.e., the Access Service Authorizer, ASA) and the entity that authenticates and authorizes the mobile node for mobility service (i.e., the Mobility Service Authorizer, MSA).
The scenario in which the Access Service Authorizer is not the Mobility Service Authorizer is called the "split" scenario.
The bootstrapping solution for the split scenario is defined in [RFC5026].
The scenario in which the Access Service Authorizer is also the Mobility Service Authorizer is called the "integrated" scenario.
This document defines a bootstrapping solution for the integrated scenario.
[RFC5026] identifies four different components of the bootstrapping problem: home agent address discovery, HoA assignment, IPsec Security Association [RFC4301]
setup, and Authentication and Authorization with the MSA.
This document defines a mechanism for home agent address discovery.
The other components of bootstrapping are as per [RFC5026].
In the integrated scenario, the bootstrapping of the home agent information can be achieved via DHCPv6.
This document defines the MIPv6 bootstrapping procedures for the integrated scenario.
It enables home agent assignment in the integrated scenario by utilizing DHCP and Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) protocols.
The specification utilizes DHCP and AAA options and attribute value pairs (AVPs) that are defined in [RFC6610] and [RFC5447].
This document specifies the interworking among Mobile Node (MN), Network Access Server (NAS), DHCP, and AAA entities for the bootstrapping procedure in the integrated scenario.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
General mobility terminology can be found in [RFC3753].
The following additional terms, as defined in [RFC4640], are used in this document: Access Service Authorizer (ASA): A network operator that authenticates a mobile node and establishes the mobile node's authorization to receive Internet service.
Access Service Provider (ASP): A network operator that provides direct IP packet forwarding to and from the mobile node.
Mobility Service Authorizer (MSA): A service provider that authorizes Mobile IPv6 service.
A service provider that provides Mobile IPv6 service.
An MSP is called a "home MSP" when MSP   MSA.
In this document, the term MSP means a Mobility Service Provider that has a roaming relationship with the MSA
but it is not the MSA.
A scenario where the mobility service and the network access service are authorized by different entities.
A scenario where the mobility service and the network access service are authorized by the same entity.
The following assumptions are made in this document: (a)  MSA   ASA.
(b)  MSA and MSP have a roaming relationship.
(c)  DHCP relay and NAS are either co located or there is a mechanism to transfer received AAA information from the NAS to the DHCP relay.
Note: If assignment of a home agent in the home MSP is not required by a deployment, co location of the NAS and the DHCP relay functions or a mechanism to transfer received AAA information from the NAS to the DHCP relay won't be necessary.
In such a case, only the implementation of the options and procedures defined in [RFC6610] should suffice.
The NAS shall support MIPv6 specific AAA attributes as specified in [RFC5447].
The AAA server in the home domain (AAAH) used for network access authentication (ASA)
has access to the same database as the AAAH used for the mobility service authentication (MSA).
If home agent assignment is required only in the ASP by the deployment, a minimal implementation of this specification MAY only support the delivery of information from the DHCP server to the DHCP client through [RFC6610].
However, if home agent assignment in the MSP is required by the deployment, an implementation conforming to this specification SHALL be able to transfer the information received from the AAA server to the NAS, and from the NAS to the DHCP relay function.
This can be achieved either by co locating the NAS and the DHCP relay functions or via an interface between these functions.
The details of this interface are out of the scope of this specification.
Logical View of the Integrated Scenario
In the integrated scenario, the mobile node utilizes the network access authentication process to bootstrap Mobile IPv6.
It is assumed that the access service authorizer is mobility service aware.
This allows for Mobile IPv6 bootstrapping at the time of access authentication and authorization.
Also, the mechanism defined in this document requires the NAS to support MIP6 specific AAA attributes and a co located DHCP relay agent.
Figure 1 shows the AAA infrastructure with a AAA client (NAS), a AAA proxy in the visited network (AAAV), and a AAA server in the home network (AAAH).
Integrated Scenario, Network Diagram with DHCP Server
The user's home network authorizes the mobile node for network access and mobility services.
Note that usage of a home agent with the mobile node might be selected in the access service provider's network or alternatively in the mobility service provider's network.
The MSP may be co located with the ASP, or the ASA/MSA, or independent of the two.
The mobile node interacts with the DHCP server via the relay agent after the network access authentication as part of the mobile node configuration procedure.
In this case, the mobile node is able to acquire the home agent address via a DHCPv6 query.
In the integrated scenario, the ASA and the MSA are the same; it can be safely assumed that the AAAH used for network access authentication (ASA) has access to the same database as the AAAH used for the mobility service authentication (MSA).
Hence, the same AAAH can authorize the mobile node for network access and mobility service at the same time.
When the MN performs Mobile IPv6 registration, the AAAH ensures that the MN is accessing the assigned home agent for that MSP.
Figure 2 shows the message sequence for home agent allocation in both scenarios
HA in the ASP (which is co located with the MSP), or HA in an MSP that is separate from ASP and possibly from the ASA/MSA as well.
Message Sequence for Home Agent Allocation 4.2.1.
Home Agent Allocation in the MSP
This section describes a scenario where the home agent is allocated in the mobile node's MSP network(s)
that is (are) not co located with the ASP.
In order to provide the mobile node with information about the assigned home agent, the AAAH conveys the assigned home agent's information to the NAS via a AAA protocol, e.g., [RFC5447].
Figure 2 shows the message sequence for home agent allocation.
In the scenario with HA in the MSP, the following details apply.
The mobile node executes the network access authentication procedure (e.g., IEEE 802.11i/802.1X), and it interacts with the NAS.
The NAS is in the ASP, and it interacts with the AAAH, which is in the ASA/MSA, to authenticate the mobile node.
In the process of authorizing the mobile node, the AAAH verifies in the AAA profile that the mobile node is allowed to use the Mobile IPv6 service.
The AAAH assigns a home agent in the home MSP, and it assigns one or more home agents in other authorized MSPs and returns this information to the NAS.
The NAS may keep the received information for a configurable duration, or it may keep the information for as long as the MN is connected to the NAS.
The mobile node sends a DHCPv6 Information request message [RFC3315] to the All DHCP Relay Agents and Servers multicast address.
Client Home Network ID FQDN option identifying the MSP.
the OPTION CLIENTID to identify itself to the DHCP server (3)
The relay agent intercepts the Information Request from the mobile node and forwards it to the DHCP server.
The relay agent also includes the received home agent information from the AAAH in the Relay Supplied Options option [RFC6610].
If a NAS implementation does not store the received information as long as the MN's session remains in the ASP, and if the MN delays sending a DHCP request, the NAS/DHCP relay does not include the Relay Supplied Options option in the Relay Forward message.
determines that the mobile node is requesting home agent information in the MSP by looking at the Home Network ID FQDN option.
determines that the home agent is allocated by the AAAH by looking at the Relay Supplied Options option.
extracts the allocated home agent information from the Relay  Supplied Options option and includes it in the Identified Home Network Information option [RFC6610] in the Reply Message.
If the requested information is not available in the DHCP server, it follows the behavior described in [RFC6610].
The relay agent relays the Reply Message from the DHCP server to the mobile node.
At this point, the mobile node has the home agent information that it requested.
Home Agent Allocation in the ASP
This section describes a scenario where the mobile node requests home agent allocation in the ASP by setting the id type field to zero in the Home Network Identifier Option [RFC6610] in the DHCPv6 request message.
In this scenario, the ASP becomes the MSP for the duration of the network access authentication session.
Figure 2 shows the message sequence for home agent allocation.
In the scenario with HA in the ASP, the following details apply.
The mobile node executes the network access authentication procedure (e.g., IEEE 802.11i/802.1X) and interacts with the NAS.
The NAS is in the ASP, and it interacts with the AAAH, which is in the ASA/MSA, to authenticate the mobile node.
In the process of authorizing the mobile node, the AAAH verifies in the AAA profile that the mobile node is allowed to use the Mobile IPv6 services.
The AAAH assigns a home agent in the home MSP, and it assigns one or more home agents in other authorized MSPs and returns this information to the NAS.
Note that the AAAH is not aware of the fact that the mobile node prefers a home agent allocation in the ASP.
Therefore, the assigned home agent may not be used by the mobile node.
This leaves the location of the mobility anchor point decision to the mobile node.
The mobile node sends a DHCPv6 Information Request message [RFC3315] to the All DHCP Relay Agents and Servers multicast address.
the OPTION CLIENTID to identify itself to the DHCP server.
(3)  The relay agent (which is the NAS) intercepts the Information Request from the mobile node and forwards it to the DHCP server.
The relay agent also includes the received AAA AVP from the AAAH in the Relay Supplied Options option [RFC6610].
The DHCP server identifies the client by looking at the DUID for the client in the OPTION CLIENTID.
The DHCP server also determines that the mobile node is requesting home agent information in the ASP by looking at the Visited Home Network Information option.
If configured to do so, the DHCP server allocates a home agent from its configured list of home agents and includes it in the Visited Home Network Information Option [RFC6610] in the Reply Message.
Note that in this case, the DHCP server does not use the received information in the Relay  Supplied Options option.
The relay agent relays the Reply Message from the DHCP server to the mobile node.
At this point, the mobile node has the home agent information that it requested.
In the fallback case, the mobile node is not able to acquire the home agent information via DHCPv6.
The mobile node MAY perform DNS queries to discover the home agent address as defined in [RFC5026].
To perform DNS based home agent discovery, the mobile node needs to know the DNS server address.
The details of how the MN is configured with the DNS server address are outside the scope of this document.
HoA and IKEv2 SA Bootstrapping in the Integrated Scenario
In the integrated scenario, the HoA, IPsec Security Association setup, and Authentication and Authorization with the MSA are bootstrapped via the same mechanism as described in the bootstrapping solution for the split scenario [RFC5026].
The transport of the assigned home agent information via the AAA infrastructure (i.e., from the AAA server to the AAA client) to the NAS may only be integrity protected as per standard Diameter or other AAA protocol security mechanisms.
No additional security considerations are imposed by the usage of this document.
The security mechanisms provided by [RFC3588] are applicable for this purpose.
This document does not introduce any new security issues to Mobile IPv6.
This contribution is a joint effort of the bootstrapping solution design team of the MEXT WG.
The contributors include Jari Arkko, Julien Bournelle, Kuntal Chowdhury, Vijay Devarapalli, Gopal Dommety, Gerardo Giaretta, Junghoon Jee, James Kempf, Alpesh Patel, Basavaraj Patil, Hannes Tschofenig, and Alper Yegin.
The design team members can be reached at the following email addresses:
