This document describes the testing result of a network utilizing a Mapping of Address and Port using Translation (MAP T) double translation solution; it provides an overview of user applications' behavior with a shared IPv4 address.
The MAP T software is from CERNET Center and the test environment is on the NIC.br network with real and virtualized machines.
This testing is based on most common applications utilized by home users.
The main purpose is to check if those applications work correctly on a network using MAP T [RFC7599].
MAP T is based on [RFC6791].
Based on testing, we know which applications could be used on a network with MAP T and the impact on a typical Internet user in Brazil.
The classification as a working application is based on user experience, not on network measurements.
Network Topology Used in the Tests
The MAP T Core and MAP T Customer Premises Equipment (CPE) are virtualized Linux machines running Fedora 11 and MAP T 1.1 software developed by CERNET (https://github.com/cernet/MAP).
The host machine is, in fact, three virtualized machines: one with Linux Kubuntu 12.04, one with Windows 7, and one with Windows XP.
The host machine is replaced in the topology to test each operating system (OS).
The IPv6 router is a Linux machine with static routes to match the MAP T network topology routes.
The NIC.br IPv4 Network is an IPv4 network with public IPv4 addresses.
It is connected to the global IPv4 Internet.
The NIC.br IPv6 Network is an IPv6 network with global unicast IPv6 addresses.
It is connected to the global IPv6 Internet.
The host may have both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, but to guarantee that the translation was being tested, the host received only an IPv4 address; the IPv4 packet must be translated to pass on the IPv6 only network.
If the host is assigned an IPv6 address, this address should have a preference as specified in [RFC6555], and the translation might not be tested in some cases where the application or the content provider is available on IPv6.
MAP T Core Configuration summary:
:d600::/56  ipv4 prefix 198.51.100.248/29  interface ipv6 only 2001:db8:6:
sh ./control stop # configure system profile echo 1
> /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip forward echo 1
/sys/net/ipv6/conf/all/forwarding echo 0 > /proc
IPv6 interface ifconfig eth0 down ifconfig eth0 up
ifconfig eth0 inet6 add 2001:
e000::2/64 ip  6 route add 2001:
A inet6 add default gw 2001:
IPv4 interface ifconfig eth1 down ifconfig
ip route add default via 192.0.2.161 dev eth1 ./control
/ivictl  r  p 198.51.100.248/29  P 2001
d600::/56  R 16  M 2 ./utils/ivictl
I eth0 service iptables stop service ip6tables
Only Router Configuration summary:  interface ipv6 to mapt core 2001:
e000::1/64  interface ipv6 to mapt cpe1 2001:
e001::1/64  interface ipv6 to gateway 2001:
/sh # configure system profile echo 1
> /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip forward echo 1
/sys/net/ipv6/conf/all/forwarding echo 0 > /proc
IPv6 interface to core ifconfig eth0 down ifconfig
ifconfig eth0 inet6 add 2001:
IPv6 interface to cpe ifconfig
IPv6 interface gateway ifconfig eth2 down ifconfig
eth2 up ifconfig eth2 inet6 add 2001:
db8:0:6160::ed19/64 ip  6 route add 2001:
ip  6 route add 2001:
ip  6 route add 2001:
e000::/64 dev eth0 ip  6 route add 2001:
via 2001:db8:0:6160::1ab6 dev eth2 service iptables stop service ip6tables
MAP T CPE 1 Configuration summary:
:d600::/56  ipv4 prefix 198.51.100.248/29  interface ipv6 only 2001:db8:6:
sh ./control stop # configure system profile echo 1
> /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip forward echo 1
/sys/net/ipv6/conf/all/forwarding echo 0 > /proc
ip  6 link set eth0 down ip
6 link set eth0 up
ip  6 addr add 2001:
ip  6 route add default via 2001:
IPv4 interface ip link set eth1 down ip link
set eth1 up ip addr
add 198.51.100.249/29 dev eth1 ./control
/ivictl  r  d  P 2001
H  a 198.51.100.250/29  P 2001:
d600::/56  R 16  M 2  o 0  c 1440
service iptables stop service ip6tables
The host could be Linux, Windows 7, or Windows XP, so there isn't a script for each of them.
The following must be configured manually:  ipv4 address 198.51.100.250/29
IPv6 is disabled The communication using IPv6 from/to the host to/from the Internet has no limitation and is not impacted by the translation mechanism.
IPv6 is disabled to guarantee that the translation is being used.
Operating Systems Used in This Test 3.1.
The table below contains the summary of the testing results.
User Experience User experience can only be evaluated subjectively: there is no quantitative rule to define if the user experience is acceptable.
Network delay, streaming experience, and download time are similar to a network without MAP T using IPv4 addresses and a NAT44 on the CPE.
The user experience was reported to be very good.
Almost all the software and websites worked correctly, the exceptions were the network traceroute and command line FTP.
The traceroute is only capable of reaching the MAP T CPE and receiving a return message that the destination net is unreachable.
The command line FTP, using active mode, is capable of connecting to the host with or without authentication, creating, deleting, and navigating folders, but it is not capable of listing folder contents or sending/receiving files.
The differences between active and passive mode are explained in [RFC959].
The BitTorrent applications can't seed or share files, since there aren't incoming connections to the host, it may cause some difficulties and low downloading speeds.
The working applications had no need of a special configuration to function.
The user experience was reported to be very good.
Almost all the software and websites worked correctly, the exceptions were the network traceroute and command line FTP.
The command line FTP doesn't work correctly because active mode requires incoming connections to specific ports without having an outbound connection on those ports.
When the test was run on FTP passive mode on Linux, the FTP worked correctly.
When the test was run on FTP passive mode on Windows 7 and Windows XP, the FTP didn't work correctly.
When using FileZilla FTP in passive mode, FTP worked on all tested operating systems.
The network traceroute doesn't work in inbound or outbound directions because there is no continuity of the IPv4 network, as it is interrupted by an IPv6 only network.
The tool is not capable of detecting the hosts in this IPv6 only network and because of that the traceroute doesn't succeed.
The testing was run with the version 1.1 of the MAP T software developed by CERNET.
In this version, the MAP T CPE uses a NAT44, so it is not possible to receive incoming connections even on the ports assigned to the host by the address plus port division.
Because of that, it is not possible to configure a server on the host.
We provided this feedback to the CERNET team and they developed a new version of the software (2.2c) that is capable of receiving incoming connections on specific ports in each CPE.
Testing Considerations Future tests should consider testing Mapping of Address and Port with Encapsulation (MAP E)
[RFC7597] as well (currently supported in the new version of CERNET's MAP software).
Other operating systems (Mac OS, Android, IOS, etc.), devices (mobile phones, tablets, video games, etc.), and programs (mail and instant messaging clients and servers) could be tested, too.
Another consideration is the port sharing ratio and
if it affects performance and functionalities.
The results of the testing made in MAP Interoperability Testing Results [MAP TESTING] are also relevant for future tests.
Impact on other protocols, like DNS and DNSSEC, could also be verified.
There are no new security considerations pertaining to this document.
Appendix A.  Application Testing Details A.1.
Open browser and input a content provider address.
Open browser and input a content provider address.
Open browser and input a content provider address.
Open browser and input a content provider address.
After loading the page, perform a new search.
Access the Google Maps service.
Perform a known street address search.
Open browser and input the MSN website address.
Open browser and input the Adobe website address.
Open browser and input the Java website address.
Open browser and input the Google address.
Check whether the video is displayed properly.
Open browser and input the YouTube address.
Check whether the video is loaded and displayed.
Open browser and input the Dailymotion address.
Check whether the video is loaded and displayed.
Open browser and input the Zappiens address.
Check whether the video is loaded and displayed.
Check whether contents are loaded and displayed.
Check whether contents are loaded and displayed.
Real Time Internet Text Messaging (Chat) Website A.7.1.
Chat Rooms of Universo Online
(UOL) Content Provider    Test Item
Open browser and input UOL address.
Send messages to the chat room.
Check whether messages are sent and displayed.
After loading the page, upload an image.
Check whether the image was uploaded.
Open Skype and perform login.
Check the exchange of messages.
Check the exchange of messages.
Linux, Windows 7, Windows XP
Check the exchange of messages.
MSN Messenger (Microsoft Notification Protocol)
Check the exchange of messages.
Linux, Windows 7, Windows XP
Join a channel and send messages.
Download and install the Vuze client.
Download and install the uTorrent client.
Download and install the Ktorrent client.
Note about BitTorrent Seeders BitTorrent uses distributed queues, each seeder owns the queues for the files they have.
The seeder informs the tracker that it has the file and the tracker informs the clients about this seeder.
The client sends messages to this announced seeder to try to download the file.
With no incoming connection, the BitTorrent fails here on the MAP
Despite being a possible seeder, the machine doesn't upload the file; without upload, it will be considered a leech and will be penalized on future downloading speeds.
This is the same problem that happens on a network with IPv4 without port forwarding.
For details about the influence on shared IPv4 addresses on torrent, see "Behavior of BitTorrent service in PCP enabled networks with Address Sharing" [PCP BITTORRENT].
Remote Access and File Transfer Software
Install openssh client (Linux) or putty (Windows)
Check whether the remote access is established.
Connect to an FTP server outside MAP T network.
Attempt to create, delete, and browser folders.
Attempt to list, send, and receive files.
To complete all described actions in the server.
Connect to an FTP server outside MAP T network.
Attempt to create, delete, and browse folders.
Attempt to list, send, and receive files.
Perform the download of a file in the Internet.
Check whether the download is completed.
Download and install Avira Antivirus.
Initiate the update of the software.
Download and install AVG Antivirus.
Initiate the update of the software.
Download and install Avast Antivirus.
Initiate the update of the software.
Media Player Updates and Video Streaming
Initiate the update of the software.
Open the menu "Internet" and access a channel.
Check whether the media content is loaded.
Initiate the update of the software.
Check whether a web page is loaded.
Download and install Windows Media Player.
Initiate the update of the software.
Check whether a web page is loaded.
Check whether there are answers to the pings.
Check whether there are answers to the pings.
Actual Result Failed to receive inbound pings, but replies to
