This document contains the definitions, originally contained in RFC 1495 and RFC 1341, on how to carry ODA in MIME, and how to translate it to its X.400 representation.
The Application/ODA MIME content type The "ODA" subtype of application is used to indicate that  a body contains  information  encoded according to the Office Document Architecture  [ODA]   standards,  using  the  ODIF representation format.
For  application/oda, the Content Type line should also specify an attribute/value  pair  that indicates  the document application profile (DAP), using the key word "profile", and the document class, using the keyword "class".
For the keyword "class", the values "formatted", "processable" and "formatted processable" are legal values.
Thus an appropriate header field  might look like this: Content Type:  application/oda; profile Q112;
class formatted Consult the ODA standard [T.411] for further information.
The Base64 content transfer encoding is appropriate for carrying ODA.
X.400 Body Part: ODA MIME Content Type: application/oda Conversion:
The ODA body part is defined in the CCITT document T.411 [T.411], appendix E, section E.2, "ODA identification in the P2 protocol of MHS"
id et oda OdaBodyPartParameters ::
OBJECT IDENTIFIER document architecture class
[1] INTEGER { formatted (0) processable (1) formatted processable(2)
{ iso (1) identified organization (3) ewos (16) eg (2)
The Parameters.document architecture class is mapped onto the MIME parameter "class" according to the table below.
This parameter is not defined in RFC 1341.
The body of the MIME content type is the Data part of the ODA body part.
When mapping from MIME to X.400, the following steps are done: The Parameters.document application profile and Parameters.document  architecture class are set from the tables above.
If any of the parameters are missing, the values for Q112 and formatted processable are used.
It is an option for the gateway implementor to try to access them from inside the document, where they are defined as document
profile.document characteristics.document architecture class document profile.document characteristics.document application  profile Gateways are NOT required to do this, since the document  characteristics are optional parameters.
If a gateway does not, it simply uses the defaulting rules defined above.
The OBJECT IDENTIFIERs for the document application profile and for ODA {2 8 0 0} must be added to the Encoded Information Types parameter of the message envelope.
Security Considerations ODA body parts have the natural propensity of complex structures that it is hard to find out what the parts are capable of.
Moreover, ODA is an extensible architecture, where new content portions may be added at any time, so that the threats posed by this body part may change over time.
However, no security risks related to ODA are known at this time.
