A Status Report Networked Information Retrieval:
Tools and Groups Produced as a collaborative effort by the Joint IETF/RARE/CNI Networked Information Retrieval Working Group (NIR WG)
The purpose of this report is to increase the awareness of Networked Information Retrieval by bringing together in one place information about the various networked information retrieval tools, their developers, interested organisations, and other activities that relate to the production, dissemination, and support of NIR tools.
NIR Tools covered include Archie, WAIS, gopher and World Wide Web.
As the network has grown, along with it there has been an increase in the number of software tools and applications to navigate the network and make use of the many, varied resources which are part of the network.
Within the past two and a half years we have seen a widespread adoption of tools such as the archie servers, the Wide Area Information Servers (WAIS), the Internet gopher, and the Worldwide Web (WWW).
In addition to the acceptance of these tools there are also diverse efforts to enhance and customise these tools to meet the needs of particular network communities.
There are many organisations and associations that are focusing on the proliferating resources and tools for networked information retrieval (NIR).
The Networked Information Retrieval Group is a cooperative effort of three major players in the field of NIR:
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the Association of European Research Networks (RARE) and the Coalition for Networked Information (CNI), specifically tasked to collect and disseminate information about the tools and to discuss and encourage cooperative development of current and future tools.
The purpose of this report is to increase the awareness of NIR by bringing together in one place information about the various networked information retrieval tools, their developers, interested organisations, and other activities that relate to the production, dissemination, and support of NIR tools.
The intention is to make this a "living document".
It will be held on line so that each section may be updated separately as appropriate.
In addition, it is intended that the full document will be updated once a year so that it provides a "snapshot" report on activities in this area.
Whilst the NIR tools in this report are being used on a wide variety of information sources including files and databases there remains much that is currently not accessible by these means.
On the other hand, the majority of the NIR Tools described here are freely available to the networked Research and Education community.
Tools for accessing specialised datasets are often only available at a cost.
It should be noted that in many ways networked information retrieval is in its infancy compared with traditional information retrieval systems.
Thesaurus construction, boolean searching and classification control are issues which are under discussion for the popular NIR Tools but as yet are not in widespread use.
However it should be said that, with the vast amount of effort that is currently going into the NIR field, rapid progress is being made.
Much work is currently being done on expanding some of the NIR tools to include handling of multimedia information services.
Progress has also been made in the discussions on classifying and cataloguing electronic information resources.
How the information was collected The information contained in this report was collected over the network from the contacts for each NIR Tool or Group using two templates: the NIR Tool Template, included in Appendix A; the NIR Group Template, included in Appendix B.
The contents of these templates were discussed by the NIR WG in Boston (July, 1992) and subsequently on the email list.
(See the Section on the NIR WG for details of how to join this mailing list.)
The initial draft report was discussed at the NIR Working Group in Washington (November, 1992) and updated and added to at subsequent WG meetings.
Before the final submission as an RFC the individual templates were reviewed by independent reviewers from around the world.
Their efforts are acknowledged in Section 9.
The NIR Tool template was used to collect the information necessary to identify and track the development of networked information retrieval tools.
This template asked for information such as how and where to get the software for each NIR Tool, documentation, demonstration sites, etc.
The main part of the template has been completed by the main individual responsible for the tool.
Sections of the template (e.g., on clients) may have required completion by others.
The NIR Group template requested information on the aim and purpose of the group, the current tasks being undertaken, mailing lists, document archives, etc.
In the current report you will find information on the following NIR tools:
Alex archie gopher Hytelnet Netfind Prospero Veronica WAIS  (including freeWAIS)
WHOIS World Wide Web  (including MOSAIC)
X.500 White Pages Appendix D covers "Forthcoming Attractions":
joint IETF/RARE WG Network Information Services Infrastructure (NISI)
OSI Directory Service (OSI DS)
Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) Whois and Network Information Lookup Service (WNILS)
USMARC/OCLC  USMARC Advisory Group; OCLC Internet Resources Cataloging Experiment (USMARC/OCLC)
Appendix C contains a list of the relevant email lists and Appendix D contains information on "Coming Attractions" which are NIR tools not yet in widespread use.
Updating Information Updates on and additions to the information contained in this report are welcome.
CNIDR have agreed to host the report and to accept updates to individual templates from the template maintainers.
Send updates using the appropriate template (from Appendix A or Appendix B of this report) to: nir updates@cnidr.org
The current templates and this report may be retrieved from the UK Mailbase Server:
Via anonymous ftp (use your email address as the password): URL: ftp://mailbase.ac.uk/pub/lists/nir/files/tool.template URL:
ftp://mailbase.ac.uk/pub/lists/nir/files/group.template URL: ftp://mailbase.ac.uk/pub/lists/nir/files/nir.status.report or via gopher or World Wide Web to mailbase.ac.uk or via email: Mail to:
mailbase@mailbase.ac.uk Text of the message: send nir tool.template send nir group.template send nir nir.status.report 5.
Overview of the types of NIR Tools
The following is an overview of major networked information retrieval (NIR) tools available on the Internet.
There are many excellent books which discuss the Internet and NIR Tools in detail.
Such books include "The Whole Internet User's Guide and Catalog" by Ed Krol and published by O'Reilly and Associates, Inc and "The Internet Guide for New Users" by Daniel Dearn and published by Meckler.
The number of these NIR tools is large and growing quickly.
Certain techniques reappear regularly and seemingly different tools may perform similar tasks, allowing a simple classification of projects encompassing most of the existing tools and services.
The classification presented here is only one possible ordering.
The goal is to define in broad outlines what can be done with particular tools, realizing that users will always find novel unanticipated ways of applying them.
Interactive Information Delivery Services (Gopher, World Wide Web)
Basic Internet services such as electronic mail and anonymous FTP can be used to share information across the Internet, but neither allows simple browsing and neither is particularly easy for the newcomer to learn to use.
Gopher and the World Wide Web (W3) are two recent developments that attempt to make it easier to distribute information over the Internet.
Both allow the user to browse information across the network without the necessity of logging in or knowing in advance where to look for information.
The Gopher project was first developed at the University of Minnesota to provide a simple campus wide on line information system.
Gopher represents information as a simple hierarchy of menus and files.
It has limited capability to recognize different types of files, allowing, for example, the display of selected types of image files.
Gateways to other services are provided (usually in a manner that is transparent to the user).
The underlying Gopher protocol is simple, and has facilitated the creation of freely available clients for use on a variety of hardware platforms and operating systems.
The more recent Gopher  protocol adds the ability to provide documents in alternate forms (PDF, PostScript, RTF, Word).
These features and the ease of installing and administering gopher servers has led to an explosive growth of gopher sites since its initial deployment.
As of November 1993, there were over 2200 known servers.
World Wide Web relies on hypertext; formatted documents are displayed, and hypertext links within the document can be selected to travel from the current document to another.
W3 allows a user to annotate documents (using hypertext links), provides gateways to other services, and has multimedia support (for example, on appropriate hardware platforms it can intermix text and images in a displayed document).
There is a range of free W3 clients, supporting many environments.
World Wide Web was originally developed at CERN for the High Energy Physics Community.
Gopher and WWW share a maintenance problem in that there is no automated way to update links to other documents when those documents are moved or removed.
Directory Service tools are intended to provide a lookup service for locating information about users (often referred to as White Pages), or services and service providers (Yellow Pages).
For example, a White Pages service might be used to locate an electronic mail address, given a name and organization, while a Yellow Pages service could be used to locate an online library catalog or file archive site.
One of the first directory services deployed on the Internet was WHOIS, a simple White Pages service created to track key network contacts for the early DARPA sponsored incarnation of the Internet.
A number of sites currently operate WHOIS servers, based on a range of extensions and enhancements to the original model.
WHOIS enjoys the advantages of simplicity and the presence of WHOIS client software on a preponderance of Internet connected hosts.
Work is underway on a more powerful protocol, known as WHOIS , which is backwards compatible with WHOIS.
The X.500 Directory Service is a much more ambitious Directory project that has been under development for a number of years under the aegis of ISO/OSI.
Implementations, concerned primarily with White pages services, are available in the public domain and from commercial sources.
There are LDAP based X.500 clients available for most major platforms, as well as a LDAP based gopher gateway to X.500.
Despite years of effort, there is still no single White Pages Directory Service for the entire Internet; Yellow Pages services remain even less well developed and deployed.
The cost of setting up the service is one obstacle; maintaining the required databases is even more daunting.
Indexing Services (archie, Veronica, online library catalogs)
There are several Internet based projects that build indexed catalogs of information to facilitate searching and retrieval.
The first such services provided network access to library card catalogs, with more recent projects indexing network based information.
The archie service began as a simple project to catalog the contents of hundreds of ftp accessible online file archives.
The archie service gathers location information, name, and other details describing such files and creates an index database.
Users can contact an archie server and search this database for files they require.
The archie service is accessible through a range of access methods, including telnet, stand alone client programs running on a user's own machine, gopher, WWW, or via electronic mail.
The initial implementation of archie tracks over 2,100,000 filenames on over 1,200 sites around the world (as of November 1993).
There are about 30 (geographically distributed) archie servers.
Both commercial and freely available versions of the archie client software are available.
Work continues on extending the archie service to provide additional types of information.
The latest version is being used to provide a prototype Yellow Pages service and directories of online library catalogs and electronic mailing lists.
Veronica arose as an attempt to do for the world of Gopher what archie did for the world of ftp.
A central server periodically scans the complete menu hierarchies of Gopher servers appearing on an ever expanding list (over 2000 sites as of November 1993).
The resulting index is provided by a veronica server and can be accessed by any gopher client.
A large number of libraries make their computerized library catalogs available over the Internet.
Most are available through telnet sessions in which the user connects to a specific address and logs in using a specific login name.
Some are also available through other tools, such as Gopher.
Text based Indexing Services (WAIS)
Wide Area Information Servers (WAIS) is a system for indexing and serving information in a network based environment.
It is distinct from indexing tools such as archie and veronica in that it is used to index text based target documents on a server, as well as descriptions of the contents of a server.
A WAIS server allows the administrator to set up an index of the documents (or resources) to be published.
The user employs a WAIS client to attach to a particular WAIS server, and specifies a search pattern which is matched against the server's index.
In early WAIS clients, searches are specified as simple natural  language queries; common ("stop")
words are removed, and Boolean "ORs" are implicitly added between the remaining list of words.
Matching documents are rank ordered according to a simple statistical weighting scheme which attempts to indicate likely relevance.
The user may choose to view selected documents, or further refine the search.
The results of one search may be used to successively refine future searches ("relevance feedback").
Gopher clients can also access WAIS servers via a transparent gateway.
Both freely available and commercial versions of WAIS servers and clients are available.
Current work is attempting to add Boolean expressions and proximity and field specifications to queries.
There are currently (as of November 1993) some 500 registered WAIS databases with an estimated 2000 additional databases that are not yet registered.
There are approximately another 100 commercial WAIS databases.
This section contains detailed information about the various NIR Tools.
ALEX Date template updated or checked:  19th March, 1994
The Alex filesystem provides users and applications transparent read access to files in anonymous FTP sites on the Internet.
Today there are thousands of anonymous FTP sites with a total of a few millions of files and roughly a terabyte of data.
The standard approach to accessing these files involves logging in to the remote machine.
This means that an application can not access remote files like local files.
This also means that users do not have any of their aliases or local tools available.
Users who want to use an application on a remote file first have to manually make a local copy of the file.
There is no mechanism for automatically updating this local copy when the remote file changes.
The users must keep track of where they get their files from and check to see if there are updates, and then fetch these.
In this approach many different users at the same site may have made copies of the same remote file each using up disk space for the same data.
Alex addresses the problems with the existing approach while remaining within the existing FTP protocol so that the large collection of currently available files can be used.
To get reasonable performance long term file caching is used.
Thus consistency is an issue.
Traditional solutions to the cache consistency problem do not work in the Internet FTP domain: callbacks are not an option as the FTP protocol has no provisions for this and polling over the Internet is slow.
Therefore, Alex relaxes file cache consistency semantics, on a per file basis, and uses special caching algorithms that take into account the properties of the files and of the network to allow a simple stateless filesystem to scale to the size of the Internet.
To a user or application, Alex is just a normal filesystem.
Any command that works on local files will work on Alex files.
Since Alex is a real filesystem, nothing needs to be recompiled and no libraries are changed.
Thus, users can apply all of their existing skills and tools for using files.
The user sees a filesystem with a hierarchical name space.
At the top level (/alex) there are top level Internet domains like "edu", "com", "uk", and "jp".
Each component of the hostname becomes a directory name.
Then the remote path is added at the end.
If the user does a "ls /alex/edu/berkeley" he sees some machine names such as "ucbvax" and "sprite" and some directories on berkeley.edu.
From the "ls" it is not clear what is where.
The user may or may not be aware of host boundaries.
Alex is implemented as a user level NFS server.
NFS was chosen because it makes it easy to add Alex to a wide range of machines.
Most machines can simply use the mount command.
The model of usage is that there is one Alex server running at each institution (though this is not required in any way).
Users mount the local server which caches files for users at that site.
Any information put into any anonymous FTP site becomes available via Alex.
: At this time Alex is a one person project (Vince).
Maybe the FTP working group.
Sponsoring Organization / Funding source: Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Information Science and Technology Office, under the title "Research on Parallel Computing,"
Work furnished in connection with this research is provided under prime contract MDA972 90 C 0035 issued by DARPA/CMO to Carnegie Mellon University.
Vincent Cate is supported by an "Intel foundation graduate fellowship".
alex servers is for people setting up an Alex fileserver.
Any machine that can NFS mount a fileserver.
What it runs over:   Unix machine and FTP Other NIR tools this interworks with: Uses FTP sites.
WAIS can be used to index files in Alex (this was done for ftpable readmes and cs techreports WAIS servers)
New versions of archie can output Alex paths.
1 412 268 3077 Server software available from:  alex.sp.cs.cmu.edu Location of more information:
No other place to go to.
Latest version number: New versions all the time.
Brief Scope and Characteristics: This software is known to still contain bugs.
Approximate number of such servers in use: 200.
General comments: You can use lpr, make, grep, more, etc.
on files around the world.
Clients: You just do an NFS mount of the server.
No client software is needed.
Access details do the following as root: mkdir /alex mount
/alex Example use: ln  s /alex/edu/cs/cmu/sp/alex/links alexlinks cd alexlinks ls
cd ls cd purdue ls lpr
If you like Alex and want to use it regularly please find, or set up, an Alex fileserver at/near your site.
FTP to alex.sp.cs.cmu.edu and "cd to doc".
Get the "README" or anything else there.
A current version of this document may be there and called "NIR.Tool".
In Alex this file is named "/alex
The current version serves a collection of filenames found at anonymous FTP sites, as well as a smaller collection of text descriptions for software, data and other information found at anonymous FTP archives.
Additional databases are under development.
User's View: Users run a client program to connect to an archie server and issue search commands to find information in an archie database.
In the case of an anonymous FTP filename, this information can then be used to fetch the file directly from the archive site using the `ftp' command.
To the user, archie could be seen as a `secondary source' of information which, because of the high cost of locating and serving, would not otherwise be available.
The user searches the archie databases through either a telnet session to a machine running an archie server, or by using a stand alone client program (which uses the Prospero protocol for sending and receiving requests).
There is also an email interface which allows users to send and receive search requests via electronic mail.
Freely available archie clients exist for most operating systems and can be fetched using anonymous FTP from most of the current archie servers.
There are also gateways to the archie system from many other NIR tools, including Gopher, WAIS and WWW.
An X.500 interface to archie is currently under development.
Information Provider's View: There are two types of information providers who would be interested in archie.
Primary information providers are interested in having a summary of the information provided by their service tracked by an archie server.
Secondary service providers, or those sites wishing to provide a "value added" service for the Internet can elect to run an archie server at their site to provide a useful service to users, to raise the profile of their institution on the Internet, or to provide market differentiation (for commercial service providers).
The archie system is of particular utility serving information where there are many sites to be searched and/or where the cost of searching each site is high.
For example, there are currently over 1,200 anonymous FTP sites on the Internet, and the number continues to grow.
Searching for a specific filename at a single site may involve scanning hundreds, or even thousands of filenames.
Thus, most operators of anonymous FTP archives welcome the fact that archie indexes and serves the names of all files available from each site tracked.
Information Types Supported: The archie system allows the gathering and serving of arbitrary information types, although the current system serves only freeform text and a dedicated text format for filename listings.
Internally, the archie system now supports a WAIS search engine and frontends for Gopher, WWW and WHOIS  for accessing archie information through Gopher clients is now being tested.
Additional collections of information to be served by the archie software will be announced.
Bunyip Information Systems Inc. Email address:
Bunyip Information Systems Inc. Email address:
Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source:
Bunyip Information Systems Inc. Funded by licensing of archie software and development contracts from sponsors.
Additional information services based upon this software are now being tested.
archie people request@bunyip.com Description: This mailing list is for people interested in the archie project and its future developments.
Announcements of upgrades, new services, etc. are made to this list.
This mailing list is for people who operate and maintain archie servers.
Announcements of bug fixes, new releases and discussion of new features are carried out on this list.
This mailing list is for people who are involved in the Internet Anonymous FTP Archives Working Group of the IETF.
This group was involved in standardizing the encoding of information at anonymous FTP archives and thus is of interest to operators and users of the archie system.
It came to completion in November, 1992 and produced two documents which have been presented to the IETF as informational RFCs.
This newsgroup is for operators and maintainers of Internet archives.
Announcements and discussions of issues related to archie are presented here, as well as discussions of more general issues relating to archiving and Internet services.
This newsgroup is for people interested in Internet related services, with a focus at the user level.
Announcements and discussions of issues related to archie are presented here, as well as discussions of more general issues relating to Internet services.
What is supported: The current archie system clients use the Prospero protocol for communication with the search engine on the archie server.
Freely available clients are available which include source to perform this communication for those wishing to implement additional clients.
The archie server is capable of building arbitrary databases, using arbitrary search and access engines and the current release ships with the public domain implementation of WAIS.
We expect future archie servers to serve information using this protocol.
The current server system assumes the TCP/IP protocol suite is available, and in particular the ftp protocol for data gathering.
The archie system can be accessed through systems operating the Gopher, WAIS and WWW (HDDL) protocols.
A gateway from the X.500 system is under development.
What it runs over: The Prospero protocol implementation runs over its own implementation of a reliable datagram protocol based upon UDP.
Data gathering runs over the TCP/IP protocol suite.
Other NIR tools this interworks with: Prospero, Gopher, WAIS, WWW.
The archie system became a commercial product in October, 1992, marketed by
Bunyip Information Systems Inc.  The company plans to market additional data gathering modules to allow the server code to build additional types of databases.
Work is also underway to integrate extensions to WHOIS to allow the building and maintaining of White Pages (names) directories.
The company is also working on other Internet information tools that will work with the archie system.
Sun SPARC running SunOS 4.1 or later.
IBM RS6000 running AIX version 3.2 or later.
for additional UNIX platforms, contact Bunyip Information Systems details.
1 514 398 8611 Server software available from:
Bunyip Information Systems Inc. email:
Additional information on the archie product line is available from the anonymous ftp archives on the various archie server sites.
Try "archie.ans.net", "archie.sura.net", "archie.au", etc.
This is the  commercial inmplementation of the archie system, replacing a version done as a Masters project at McGill University during the period 1990 1992.
It comes with an archie telnet client that offers a number of minor improvements over earlier versions.
Additional releases, with a number of additional improvements, are planned in the coming months.
Approximate number of such servers in use: Currently about 27 (not all are publicly available)
Most users access archie through a freeware or public domain client program.
These are available from most archie servers via anonymous FTP.
Check out the archie directory on any of the publicly available archie servers or the banner message when logging into any of the archie telnet clients for more details.
Look for filename "c archie 1.3.2.tar.
This program provides a simple command line interface to the archie server system, using the Prospero protocol.
Written in C, it has been ported to MSDOS and OS2.
This program should not be confused with the archie system telnet interface, which is a program that runs on the archie server itself.
Works with both UNIX and MSDOS/OS2 shells.
Look for filename "perl archie 3.8.tar.
This program provides a simple command line interface to the archie server system, using the Prospero protocol.
This program should not be confused with the archie system telnet interface, which is a program that runs on the archie server itself.
Look for filename "archie vms.com".
Brief Scope and Characteristics: This program provides a simple command line interface to the archie server system for users of VMS.
This program should not be confused with the archie system telnet interface, which is a program that runs on the archie server itself.
Look for file "xarchie 1.3.tar.
This program provides an Xwindows client that allows users to search the archie anonymous FTP database.
Also included is the capability of fetching files (using ftp).
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
This program provides a NeXTStep client that allows users to search the archie anonymous FTP database.
Also included is the capability of fetching files (using ftp).
Future plans:  Not known   Demonstration sites:
(University of Nebraska in Lincoln)
Client software should be supported at all of these sites.
Use the "sites" command in the archie telnet interface at any of the above sites for a more complete lists.
: telnet to any of the above sites login as user `archie' (no password is required) type `help' at the prompt to get started.
Some people forget and use ftp in place of telnet.
The hint that this is being done is that they claim that a password is needed, not that the site can't be found.
What is archie Location details:
This document also explains the various search options and other features, so is of use to users of the other archie client programs.
What's New in 3.0 Location details:
Mark P. McCahill Email address:
NIR Tool Name:  Internet Gopher Brief Description of Tool:
The Internet Gopher protocol is a client/distributed server document search and retrieval protocol originally developed at the University of Minnesota.
Gopher was originally created as a fast, simple, distributed, campus wide information search and retrieval system; ease of use and implementation has made Gopher increasingly popular on the Internet.
Since its original release, many folks on the Internet have contributed to its growth, submitting patches, servers, clients, and linking their local servers into the worldwide network of Gopher servers.
Gateways exist to seamlessly access a variety of non Gopher services such as ftp, WAIS, USENET news, Archie, Z39.50 (1992 rev), X.500 directories, Sybase and Oracle SQL servers, etc.
In addition, an "archie for gopherspace" called Veronica (very easy rodent oriented net wide index to computerized archives) has been developed at the University of Nevada.
Veronica makes it easy to search for items in gopherspace by title.
The gopher protocol is often described as "fiercely simple"; it is connectionless (stateless), and uses TCP reliable streams.
A client connects to a server using TCP, and sends a one line text "selector string".
The server responds by returning the item (a file, a directory listing, or a link to some other service) corresponding to the selector string and immediately closing the connection.
Items in directory listings are returned as a series of lines terminated by carriage return line feed.
Each item (line) is defined by a one  character tag to specify the item type, a display string or item name that the client should display to the user, and a number of tab delimited fields to specify the selector string, host domain name and port number.
Because of its simple and connectionless nature, gopher servers make very minimal demands on their host machines and gopher clients are extremely easy to implement.
The users view the Gopher world as a series of networked hierarchical directories much like a familiar filesystem.
However, the links define a graph rather than a simple rooted tree.
Links in the Gopher graph may define services other than simple files or directories; these include cso (qi) servers, telnet sessions, links to other gopher servers, and links to gateway servers.
The information provider's simplest view is that files and directories below a certain root directory on their machine are all visible and available for retrieval by gopher clients.
More features like long names, item types, links, and gateway services are available to the more sophisticated information provider.
Servers and clients run on most popular hardware, including Macs, UNIX boxes, PC DOS boxes.
The Internet Gopher name is copyright (c) 1991 1992 by the University of Minnesota.
The Internet Gopher protocol is described in an informational RFC (1436) available at better RFC archives everywhere.
Extensions to the base gopher protocol allow for associating meta information with gopher items, alternate views of documents (i.e., text, postscript, rtf, etc.) and electronic forms.
Collectively, these extensions are referred to as Gopher .
Gopher  is upward compatible with the orginal gopher protocol.
The gopher software may be retrieved from numerous Gopher or FTP archive sites, including the University of Minnesota Gopher server, the Info Mac Archive Gopher server, and by anonymous FTP from boombox.micro.umn.edu and sumex aim.stanford.edu.
As of December 1993, about 1/3 of the approximately 4800 Gopher servers on the internet support Gopher .
Microcomputer & Workstation Networks Center 152 Shepherd Labs 100 Union Street SE.
University of Minnesota Minneapolis, MN 55455
USA: 612 MA MICRO ( 1 612 626 4276)
Helpline is for general support at the U of M. Level of support offered:
Phone Helpline 9 4 weekdays.
Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source:
The University of Minnesota, Twin Cities.
News and views of all things gopher.
Tends to be a high volume mailing list and technically oriented.
; connect to the gopher server at gopher.tc.umn.edu port 70, look in the "Information About Gopher" section.
Other NIR tools this interworks with: Z39.50 WAIS variant via WAIS gateway FTP via FTP gateway archie/Prospero via an archie gateway veronica (an archie for gopherspace) NNTP via NNTP gateway Finger (subset of gopher) X.500 via X.500 gateway Z39.50 1992 revision variant via Z39.50 gateway Oracle and Sybase SQL servers via SQL gateway CSO (Ph/Qi)
Server, index server for WAIS based indices and for NeXT native indexing, tools, gateway code.
Approximate number of such servers in use: Over 3000.
General comments: The defacto standard workhorse Gopher server.
Paul Lindner is the architect and keeper of this server.
Brief Scope and Characteristics: Macintosh Gopher Server and tools, supports Gopher .
Approximate number of such servers in use: Current estimates between 300 and 400.
General comments: Runs on any Macintosh with 1MB memory or more.
Can be configured to use Apple Computer's AppleSearch full text search software as a Gopher accessible search engine.
Basic Gopher server for PC DOS boxes.
Approximate number of such servers in use: Current estimates between 25 and 75.
General comments: Written by Chris McNeil <cmcneil@mta.ca>, based on Phil Karns net package.
The U of M Gopher team forwards difficult problems to Chris.
Approximate number of such servers in use: 35 40 servers in use.
The VMS server was written and is maintained by J. Lance Wilkinson, Foteos Macrides, Bruce Tanner and others on the VMSGopher L@trln.lib.unc.edu mailing list.
EDU:/pub/vmcms/ Location of more information:
Gopher server for IBM VM/CMS installations.
Approximate number of such servers in use: Unknown.
This server was written and is maintained by Rick Troth.
This server is commonly referred to as the Rice VM/CMS server.
There is also another VM/CMS server: the Vienna VM/CMS server.
Gopher server for IBM VM/CMS installations.
Approximate number of such servers in use: Unknown.
This server was written and is maintained by Gerhard Gonter.
This server is commonly referred to as the Vienna VM/CMS server.
There is also another VM/CMS server: the Rice VM/CMS server.
Gopher server for IBM MVS installations.
Approximate number of such servers in use: Unknown.
This server was written and is maintained by Steve Bacher.
Unix veronica server Primary Contact:
veronica server software Approximate number of such servers in use:
Written and maintained by Steve Foster at the University of Nevada.
Additional support for searching on Gopher  attributes
1 612 625 1300 Client software available from:
One of the many Macintosh Gopher clients.
Macintosh TurboGopher is as of this writing, the fastest Gopher client available for the Mac.
Written by the Minnesota Gopher Development Team.
One of the many Macintosh Gopher clients.
Written and maintained by Don Gilbert.
ftp.cc.utah.edu:/pub/gopher/Macintosh/ Location of more information: As above.
One of the many Macintosh Gopher clients.
Has a browser style interface.
Written and maintained by "Jonzy".
1 612 625 1300 Client software available from:
The UNIX curses based client.
Written and maintained by Paul Lindner.
sgopher is a simple gopher client for inetd/batch/online; it does not require much of the terminal other than it be 80X24 characters.
It can be run stand alone or it can be launched from inetd.
It doesn't use termcap or curses.
Sgopher outputs the \r\n pair at the end of line and requires a <return> after each command to support more terminal types.
General comments: Runs on VMS, IRIX, Ultrix, AIX, Solaris 2.x, Solaris 1.x
UNIX XWindows based client Primary Contact
: Makes use of the X interface.
Written and maintained by Allan Tuchman.
Gopher  support planned for the future.
UNIX XWindows based client Primary Contact:
: Makes use of the X interface...
displays a way cool chewing gopher icon while information is being downloaded.
General comments: XView based gopher client.
1 612 625 1300 Client software available from:
Brief Scope and Characteristics: Makes full use of the NeXT interface.
Initial version written by Max Tardiveau.
Now maintained by Paul Lindner.
DOS TurboVision w/Clarkson packet drivers Primary Contact
1 612 625 1300 Client software available from:
: Character based graphics and windows under DOS.
Uses either Clarkson Packet drivers (CRWYN packet drivers) and a built in TCP/IP protocol stack or Ftp, Inc.'s protocol stack (PC/TCP).
General comments: The VMS client was written and is maintained by Mark Van Overbeke.
1 612 625 1300 Client software available from:
Works on a VMS 5.5 2 system running MultiNet 3.1B.  UCX and Wollongong are also supported.
A port of the University of Minnesota Unix client to VMS.
Gopher client for IBM VM/CMS installations.
This client was written and is maintained by Rick Troth.
This client is commonly referred to as the Rice VM/CMS client.
There is also another VM/CMS client: the Vienna VM/CMS client.
Gopher client for IBM VM/CMS installations.
This client was written and is maintained by Gerhard Gonter.
This client is commonly referred to as the Vienna VM/CMS client.
There is also another VM/CMS client: the  Rice VM/CMS client.
Gopher client for DOS with PC/TCP General comments:
Written and maintained by Steven E. Newton Future plans:
Gopher client for DOS with PC NFS General comments
DOS Novell LWP Gopher Client
pub/gopher Location of more information: As above.
LWP Gopher Client General comments:
Written and maintained by Jeremy T. James.
Gopher client for Windows; uses either Winsock DLL or PC/NFS network interface.
Written and maintained by Martyn Hampson.
gophbook.zip Location of more information: As above.
Gopher client for Windows; uses Asymetrix's ToolBook to paint the screen and speaks to the network via a Winsock DLL.
206 447 0300 Client software available from: Location of more information:
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
1 708 866 0159 Client software available from: Location of more information:
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
resmer@eis.calstale.edu Client software available from: Location of more information:
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
General Comments: Macintosh and windows clients include netnews, email.
Demonstration sites: List of sites which are willing to act as demonstration sites for this application.
Title:  (1) Gopher Protocol and (2)
Gopher  Proposed Extensions Location details:
Via Gopher: U of M Gopher Information About Gopher Gopher Software Distribution Via FTP: boombox.micro.umn.edu /pub
The Internet Gopher Protocol (a distributed document search and retrieval protocol)
The Whole Internet, Ed Kroll, O'Reilly, 1992
The Internet Gopher, "ConneXions", July 1992, Interop.
"The Internet Society News", v1n2 1992
The Internet Gopher Protocol, Proceedings of the Twenty Third IETF, CNRI, Section 5.3 Internet Gopher, Proceedings of Canadian Networking '92
Section 10.5.5 Tools help Internet users discover on line treasures, Computerworld, July 20, 1992 TCP/IP Network Administration, O'Reilly.
"SPIGopher: Making SPIRES databases accessible through the Gopher protocol".
SPIRES Fall '92 Workshop, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
HYTELNET Date template updated or checked: 28 February, 1994
NIR Tool Name: HYTELNET Brief Description of Tool
: HYTELNET is a terminate and stay resident hypertext browser, which gives a user full instructions for logging into telnet accessible sites on the Internet i.e., library catalogs, campus wide information systems, bulletin boards, directory services, gophers, etc.
The browser does not make remote connections.
A Unix/VMS version, which does make remote connections, has been written by Earl Fogel, Computing Services, University of Saskatchewan.
Macintosh and Amiga versions are also available (see ftp site information below).
1 306 966 5920 Level of support offered:
aa375@freenet.carleton.ca Description: To inform members of new versions of the software, and to keep users informed of new/changed/defunct Telnet accessible sites To subscribe send e mail message to listserv@kentvm.kent.edu with no subject, and    sub hytel l firstname lastname  as the body of the message.
What is supported: What it runs over: Other NIR tools this interworks with:
Possible translation into gopher format
1 306 966 5920 Client software available from: ftp.usask.ca in pub/hytelnet/pc as hytelnXX.zip, where XX   latest version number.
Future plans: To contine to produce updated versions in current form.
The Unix/VMS version can be accessed via telnet to access.usask.ca (login: hytelnet)
None   Bibliography: HYTELNET as software for accessing the Internet: a personal perspective on the development of HYTELNET.
2, No. 1 Spring 1992
In: Designing Information: new roles for librarians.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 1993
Netfind Brief Description of Tool:
Given the name of a person on the Internet and a rough description of where the person works, Netfind attempts to locate information about the person.
People can be specified by first, last, or login name.
Their place of work can be described by name and/or the city/state/country.
Netfind provides textual information about people, when it is able to locate such information.
It is not a directory in the usual sense of the word.
Rather, it searches for people using a number of Internet services and heuristics about how to locate user information.
Because of the techniques it uses, Netfind can locate information about more people than any other Internet user directory over 5 million people in over 9,000 domains worldwide when last measured.
You can use the University of Colorado Netfind server by telnet to bruno.cs.colorado.edu: login as "netfind" (with no password).
Help screens providing more detailed instructions and technical information are available there.
There is currently no way for non  Internet users to access Netfind (e.g., using an email interface).
Department of Computer Science University of Colorado Boulder,
Netfind is currently a volunteer service.
We do not have staff resources to support telephone inquiries.)
: There are an increasing number of Netfind servers being set up at various Network Information Centers (including the U.S. Internic).
However, since Netfind is provided as a volunteer service at this time, there is no help line.
Related Working Groups: Gopher, NIR, IIIR, IRTF RD.
Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source: None.
Netfind was originally a research prototype.
It is offered as is, on an unsupported basis.
From time to time the original developers make improvements, but it is not currently funded.
At present no formal protocol is used.
We are currently implementing a client/ server protocol, which will allow better clients and more efficient servers.
Other NIR tools this interworks with: Finger, Gopher, PH, SMTP, USENET news, UUCP maps, Various NIC databases, Various service logs, WAIS, WHOIS, X.500,
Telnet to the server and see the "Future Directions" menu under the "Frequently Asked Questions" help menu.
In addition to the above list, we are currently exploring possibilities to integrate the Netfind seed database gathering mechanisms into the Fremont framework, to make the process more scalable, and to support other types of information (e.g., to help with mapping the Internet).
whether Netfind will run on Solaris.
Server software available from: ftp.cs.colorado.edu, in the directory pub/cs/distribs/netfind.
Location of more information: in above directory.
This version of Netfind incorporates the ability for sites to register a set of URLs in their DNS server, pointing Netfind to a variety of different sources for information.
Netfind can now tap information from X.500, WHOIS, and PH, in addition to the previous sources it used (finger, etc.).
For more information see ftp://ftp.cs.colorado.edu/pub/cs/distribs/netfind/Netfind.WP.URLs Approximate number of such servers in use: 17 public servers; hundreds or thousands of private stand alone clients.
Clients: The Netfind client is available in the same release as the server.
bruno.cs.colorado.edu The current list is: archie.au (AARNet, Melbourne, Australia)
bruno.cs.colorado.edu (University of Colorado, Boulder)
Council for Techn. & Scien.
Research, Venezuela) ds.internic.net (InterNIC Directory and DB Services, S. Plainfield, NJ)
(California State University, Fullerton, CA)
malloco.ing.puc.cl (Catholic University of Chile, Santiago)
(Imperial College, London, England) mudhoney.micro.umn.edu (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis) netfind.anu.edu.au (Australian National University, Canberra)
netfind.ee.mcgill.ca (McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada)
netfind.if.usp.br (University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil)
netfind.oc.com (OpenConnect Systems, Dallas, Texas) netfind.vslib.cz (Liberec University of Technology, Czech Republic)
(Korea Network Information Center, Taejon, Korea) nic.uakom.sk
(Academy of Sciences, Banska Bystrica, Slovakia)
redmont.cis.uab.edu (University of Alabama at Birmingham)
: There are three primary sets of information available about Netfind.
The first is a set of help information, available in the FTP distribution as well as from the help screens available from any Netfind server.
This information includes a fairly complete set of Frequently Asked Questions, as well as user help information and pointers to other related information.
The second is a pre publication version of a technical paper about Netfind, available in ftp://ftp.cs.colorado.edu/pub/cs/techreports/schwartz/PostScript/ Netfind.
Z  (compressed PostScript) or ftp://ftp.cs.colorado.edu/pub/cs/techreports/schwartz/ASCII/ Netfind.
An earlier paper is also available in ftp://ftp.cs.colorado.edu/pub/cs/techreports/schwartz/PostScript/ White.
Z, containing some of the original ideas in Netfind and measurements of the system.
Gathering paper contains an up to date description of the data gathering and integration algorithms.
The third source of information focuses particularly on the URL based remote site customization mechanism, and is available in ftp://ftp.cs.colorado.edu/pub/cs/distribs/netfind/Netfind.WP.URLs   Bibliography: Netfind is one prototype developed by the Networked Resource Discovery Project, at the University of Colorado Boulder.
A bibliography and set of project papers is available by anonymous FTP from ftp.cs.colorado.edu, in pub/cs/techreports/schwartz.
This directory contains a file called "README" that contains a project overview and bibliography.
The files in this directory are also available via an electronic mail interface.
For more information, send a mail message to infosrv@ftp.cs.colorado.edu, containing the message body (not subject line) "send HELP" (without quotes).
PROSPERO Date template updated or checked:  1 March, 1994
NIR Tool Name: Prospero Brief Description of Tool:
The Prospero directory service supports a user centered view of files scattered across the Internet.
It can be used to organize references to files as if they were on your local system, without the need to physically move them.
Prospero provides access to existing directories and indices that can be used to find files of interest that are available from Internet archive sites.
Among the indices available is the archie database and a gateway to all Gopher menus, files, and searches.
We hope to have WAIS indices and World Wide Web documents online in the near future.
Prospero also provides a mechanism to make directories and indices available to end users and applications in a format that allows information from different sources to be integrated into a coherent whole.
Prospero does not interpret the data that it organizes.
It does provide mechanisms to retrieve the data, but the display and use of the data is up to the user's application.
Prospero is intended to serve as infrastructure that integrates information from a variety of sources and supports a variety of user applications.
Prospero allows fine grained authorization of requests to all objects, including directories and indices.
Prospero supports the authentication of clients through four mechanisms: (a) simple client assertion of the user's identity; (b) a trusted port mechanism similar to that used by the Berkeley UNIX R commands; (c)
a simple cleartext passwording mechanism; (d) Kerberos (version 5).
The maintainer of an ACL chooses which of these mechanisms he or she wishes to accept as proof of the client's identity.
Marina del Rey, CA 90292 6695
Marina del Rey, CA 90292 6695
: Name: Info Prospero Email address:
WG IETF NIR WG IRTF Resource Discovery WG   Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source: Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
The design and implementation was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (Grant No. CCR 8619663), the Washington Technology Center, Digital Equipment Corporation, and the Advanced Research Projects Agency under NASA Cooperative Agreement NCC 2 539.
Send mail to INFO PROSPERO to obtain information about Prospero, papers, or the release.
Mail to INFO PROSPERO will not be passed on to subscribers.
INFO PROSPERO is also the list to which we will send status updates and information on how to obtain new releases.
Via Prospero in the "#/INET/EDU/ISI/GUEST/prototype" virtual system
What is supported: Prospero directory service requests are formatted according to the Prospero protocol.
Prospero does not have its own file retrieval protocol.
Files may be automatically retrieved using FTP, NFS, AFS, and GOPHER.
Loginable services may also be accessed via TELNET.
What it runs over: Directory service requests are layered on top of UDP, with our own (included) reliable message delivery layer.
Other NIR tools this interworks with: Archie, Gopher, Wais, WWW Future plans:
1 310 822 1511 Server software available from: Via anonymous FTP: PROSPERO.ISI.EDU, /pub/prospero/prospero.tar.
Z, in the "#/INET/EDU/ISI/GUEST/prototype" virtual system.
Note that the name prospero.tar.
Z refers to the most stable release (currently Beta version 5.1).
If you want the latest version of the server (which includes the Gopher gateway), you should retrieve it by version number; the name for the latest version is prospero alpha.5.2.tar.
Z Location of more information: Contained within the release.
Alpha Version 5.3 Brief Scope and Characteristics:
The server allows the maintainer to make directory information available about selected portions of the server's filesystem, such as anonymously FTPable files.
The server also is used to publish information from other databases, such as Archie.
The server also allows users and maintainers to store their own customized organizing views of the namespace.
Alpha.5.2 of the server includes a gateway feature which treats all Gopher servers as a Prospero database.
Approximate number of such servers in use: 50 General comments:
We have a prototype NFS server that makes Prospero queries, but it is not yet ready to release.
We plan to develop a gateway similar to the existing Gopher gateway feature for World Wide Web.
There is also active work being done on exporting WAIS indices through Prospero in a way similar to the way the archie database is exported.
Clients: Date completed or updated:
1 310 822 1511 Client software available from: Via anonymous FTP: PROSPERO.ISI.EDU, /pub/prospero/prospero.tar.
Z, in the "#/INET/EDU/ISI/swa" virtual system.
Note that the name prospero.tar.
Z refers to the most stable release (currently Beta version 5.1).
If you want the latest version of the clients (which includes the Prospero menu browser), you should retrieve it by version number; the name for the latest version is prospero alpha.5.2.tar.
Alpha Version 5.2 Brief Scope and Characteristics:
We provide two client interfaces.
The older one is a command line client, which can be configured to use the same syntax to navigate through the Prospero namespace that a user uses to navigate through the UNIX filesystem.
The newer one is a menu  based file and directory browser similar to the UNIX Gopher client.
Archie clients also make queries in the Prospero namespace, so all Archie clients are Prospero clients too.
They are better described in the Archie report.
Future plans: We are working on enhancing the menu browser client to allow users to remotely customize and update virtual systems.
We plan to develop a Prospero hypertext browser.
A guest virtual system is available on PROSPERO.ISI.EDU.
However, to use it, you must compile the Prospero command line client on your own machine.
Instructions for using it come with the Prospero distribution.
All of these papers are available via anonymous FTP from PROSPERO.ISI.EDU.
They may additionally be obtained through Prospero itself by preceding the 'Full file name:'
given below with '/sites/isi.edu' and looking in the '#/INET/EDU/ISI/GUEST/prototype' virtual system.
Document Title: The Prospero Protocol, version
Full file name: /pub/prospero/doc/prospero protocol.
PS.Z Document Title: Prospero User's Manual Location details: Site: PROSPERO.ISI.EDU
Full file name: /pub/prospero/doc/prospero user manual.
Prospero Library Manual Location details:
Full file name: /pub/prospero/doc/prospero library manual.
Prospero Menu based Browser API Manual Location details:
Full file name: /pub/prospero/doc/prospero menu api.
Description of Prospero Documents and Papers Location details:
Full file name: /pub/prospero/papers/README prospero documents
A bibliography listing all publicly available Prospero documents and papers is available via anonymous FTP from PROSPERO.ISI.EDU as /pub/prospero/README prospero documents
The following papers are also available via anonymous FTP from PROSPERO.ISI.EDU: Prospero:/papers/subjects/operating systems/prospero/prospero bii.ps.
A Base for Building Information Infrastructure", BOOKTITLE
, this is the first paper you probably want to read about Prospero.
This paper describes how Prospero can be used to integrate internet information services, including Gopher, WAIS, Archie, and World Wide Web.
The paper was presented at INET'93 in August.
Z Anonymous FTP: /pub/prospero/papers/prospero oir.ps.
A Tool for Organizing {I}nternet Resources", JOURNAL
This is the first paper we give to more general computer science audiences to read.
It's also a good first paper to look at.
It gives a good overview of Prospero and what it does.
It also describes a bit about the Virtual System model, of which Prospero is a prototype implementation.
, not how it does it.
This is a good third paper to read about Prospero.
This one is targeted more toward system implementors.
It provides more implementation details than the paper on organizing Internet resources, but less of the vision of how Prospero can be used together with other systems.
Z Anonymous FTP: /pub/papers/prospero/prospero smlic.ps.
This paper describes how the Prospero Directory Service can be used to solve the server selection problem and the user location problem.
The paper was presented in August at the Usenix Symposium on Mobile and Location Independent Computing.
Anonymous FTP: /pub/prospero/papers/UW CS 89 01 07.PS.Z
This describes the initial vision for the Virtual System Model, the model on which Prospero is based.
Much of the material in this paper appears in greater detail in other papers.
Anonymous FTP: /pub/prospero/papers/UW CSE 90
A Scalable Approach to Organizing Large Systems (A Thesis Proposal)", INSTITUTION
This paper describes the reasons that operating systems need to support closure, that is they need to make it clear which name space is to be used when resolving names.
While closure is one of the important features of Prospero, the concept should be applied in other operating systems too.
Prospero: /papers/subjects/operating systems/prospero/prospero neuman thesis.ps.
Z Anonymous FTP: /pub/prospero/papers/prospero neuman thesis.ps.
} This is Clifford Neuman's Ph.D. Dissertation.
It is currently the definitive work on Prospero and the Virtual System Model.
Includes an obsolete version of the Prospero User's Manual and of the Prospero Protocol Specification.
: We provide three documented library interfaces to Prospero in order to make client writing easy.
The PFS and PCOMPAT libraries are documented in the library reference manual.
The PFS library allows one to directly make Prospero requests and parse the results and to manipulate Prospero objects as abstractions.
The PCOMPAT library is an interface to the PFS library which uses the same interface as the UNIX filesystem; one can link many existing programs with the PCOMPAT library in order to get it to resolve names in the Prospero namespace.
It is not as portable as the PFS library and does not provide as much functionality.
The third library interface is the menu browser API library.
It is documented in the menu based browser API manual and is used by our menu based browser.
NIR Tool Name:  veronica Brief Description of Tool:
veronica: Very Easy Rodent Oriented Net wide Index to Computerized Archives.
veronica is the comprehensive title index of the world's gopher servers.
Because of veronica, the Gopher web is a search and  retrieval system as well as a browsing system.
veronica is popular because the ubiquitous Gopher client can both access the search server, and provide immediate access to the discovered resources.
Taking advantage of Gopher's linked menus, and of the policy of open access at most gopher sites, veronica finds and indexes almost all items on publicly accessible gopher servers.
As of February, 1994, veronica holds indexes to more than 3200 gopher servers on approximately 2500 internet hosts.
In February 1994 the public access veronica sites served an estimated 1,200,000 queries.
Most queries are resolved in less than twenty seconds.
Eight server sites offer searches to the internet community, and several other institutions run servers for internal access.
veronica is easily accessed via any Gopher client.
It offers various types of searches, ranging from single keyword searches to boolean queries of indefinite complexity.
A veronica search originates with a user's request for a search, submitted from a gopher client.
The searches may include boolean operators ( AND, OR, NOT, and parentheses ) and several options to control the number of items returned, and to restrict the search to certain gopher types.
The result of a veronica search is a set of gopher type data items, which is returned to the gopher client as a gopher menu.
Each item on this menu contains the user's desired keyword or keywords in the item title.
The user can access any of the gopher items by selecting from the returned menu.
Items on this menu may be drawn from many gopher servers.
Because veronica is accessed through gopher clients, it provides immediate access to all types of data supported by the gopher protocol and the client implementation.
The veronica service comprises two functions: 1
) Harvesting menu data from gopher servers, and preparing it for use; 2) Offering searches of that database to gopher clients.
These two functions are not necessarily provided by the same host computer.
Currently collection and preparation of data are done at University of Nevada, and datasets are distributed to the other veronica servers.
The veronica service infrastructure has been fairly stable since July, 1993, with eight server sites offering searches for the internet community (March 1994).
These servers are supported by the participating institutions: NYSERNET, PSI, SERRA, CNIDR, University of Koeln, SUNET, University of Bergen and the University of Nevada System Computing Services.
Several additional servers offer searches with access limited to internal users; in this class are servers at MSU, SUNET, and the Australian University system.
An auxiliary tool to build a locally held menu of Public available has been created.
Called "maltshop", it has been distributed since January, 1994.
It appears that maltshop is rapidly being accepted, but its long term effect on loading of the servers may be problematic.
VERONICA development team SCS Computer Center Building  mailstop 270 University of Nevada, Reno Reno, NV  89557 0023
1 702 784 4292  or  1 702
SCS Computer Center Building  mailstop 270 University of Nevada, Reno Reno, NV  89557 0023
1 702 784 4292  or  1 702
SCS Computer Center Building  mailstop 270 University of Nevada, Reno Reno, NV  89557 0023
1 702 784 4292  or  1 702
FACETS   Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source: University and Community College System of Nevada Computer Services, and University of Nevada, Reno.
Additional support has been provided by CNIDR, Pandora Systems, Inc., and
Pacific Bell Co. Server hosts have been provided by the sites listed above in the Description section.
veronica discussion happens on comp.infosystems.gopher   Protocols:
Implement extensions with Gopher .
Per site updates of indexes.
Indexes for USENET news and LISTSERV articles.
1 702 784 4292 or  1 702 784 6557 Server software available from:
veronica.scs.unr.edu veronica code/ veronica data/
Z Location of more information:
gopher.cnidr.org veronica veronica faq how to compose veronica queries
Data collector runs on any Unix computer that does TCP and compiles perl.
This has not been distributed yet.
Data collection, data preparation, and indexing are being done at veronica.scs.unr.edu.
The harvester "walks" all advertised gopher servers, and any newly discovered servers.
Almost all redundant links are removed, leaving the ( hopefully ) canonical reference for each item.
Indexes are built at Nevada, and the indexed dataset is distributed to server sites.
Servers run on unix computers and answer to gopher type 7 requests.
Boolean keyword logic is implemented.
See file "how to compose veronica queries".
Several options allow retrieval of items with specified gopher types, retrieval of a file of links containing the search results, and override for the default limit on number of results returned, which is 200 items.
Server software runs on most flavors of unix, requires dbm and perl, and requires about 1.4 GB of data on disk, with considerable /tmp space available.
Server software is available to any site which wants to run a server.
Server sites are encouraged to offer the service to the net at large.
Approximate number of such servers in use:  twelve.
Maltshop builds a menu of Public Gopher Servers for the local gopher menu.
veronica.scs.unr.edu veronica code/ menu builder 0.2d
/Search ALL of Gopherspace 12/Script to automate your local Veronica menu General comments: Basic veronica service has been fairly stable since July 1993.
Indexing is quite efficient, and most queries are resolved in ten seconds or quicker.
More than 1,000,000 queries were resolved in February, 1994.
Though veronica is well accepted at this level of service, we are undertaking significant upgrade efforts during Winter 93 94.
veronica is accessed through any of the gopher clients.
Open "veronica" folder; choose one of the search types available.
Other Gopher and Information Servers Search Gopherspace with veronica.
choose one of the search types available.
Open "Search the Internet" folder; choose one of veronica searches.
Open "University of Pisa Services"  folder; choose the veronica search.
Common Questions and answers about veronica, a title search and retrieval system for use with the internet gopher.
Other Gopher and Information services Search Gopherspace with veronica veronica FAQ Full file name
veronica veronica FAQ Full file name:
veronica How to Compose veronica Search Queries.
veronica How to Compose veronica Search Queries.
Full file name:  how to query veronica
veronica About veronica Full file name:
Other Gopher and Information services Search Gopherspace with veronica About veronica Full file name:
veronica About veronica Full file name:
freeWAIS (CNIDR) Date template updated or checked:
1 March 1994 By: Name: Jane Smith and Jim Fullton Email address:
Jane.Smith@CNIDR.org and Jim.Fullton@CNIDR.org   NIR Tool Name:   WAIS Brief Description of Tool:
The Wide Area Information Servers system is an electronic publishing software set which allows you to search out and retrieve multimedia information from databases anywhere in the world.
WAIS databases may be accessed by WAIS, gopher, and WWW clients (such as Mosaic), and via online services such as Delphi and America OnLine.
WAIS software includes user interfaces for most platforms, and server software that provides automatic indexing of databases.
WAIS was developed by Thinking Machines Corporation of Cambridge, Massachusetts in collaboration with Apple Computer, Inc., Dow Jones & Company, and KPMG Peat Marwick.
With over 100 databases and 5,000 users worldwide, WAIS is rapidly becoming a standard for information distribution within the Internet environment.
WAIS is a client server application.
Most of the clients remain freely available with a few exceptions.
Inc.  develops and sells commercial versions of WAIS and the Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval (CNIDR)
develops freeWAIS, a version free for distribution and use.
A few freely distributable versions remain available from Thinking Machines, Inc.  and other organizations.
WAIS allows multimedia information to be stored anywhere on any platform.
Using your interface of choice, WAIS enables you to find personal, corporate and public information.
The information is accessible regardless of format: text, formatted documents, pictures, spreadsheets, graphics, sound, or video.
WAIS recognizes natural language queries.
The search and retrieval of relevant information is made using your native language.
To date, we have used English, French, Italian, and Latin!
The most relevant documents, regardless of size, can be sent back to the server in their entirety to further refine your search (telling the server, "Find me more like this document."
Proven searches can be automatically repeated, monitoring and alerting you to new information as it becomes available.
WAIS uses a single computer to computer protocol (NISO Z39.50  1988).
Each WAIS server reads your question and based on its words, searches the full text of the database for the most relevant documents, and ranks them using automatic word weighting.
Servers need not fully understand your query; the retrieval process is based on a search method called relevance feedback.
Noel Drive, Suite 102, Menlo Park CA 94025
Help Line (WAIS, Inc.): Name:
IIIR (Integrating Internet Information Resources)
Working Group URI (Uniform Resource Identifiers)
Working Group   Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source (WAIS, Inc.): WAIS,
Inc.   Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source (CNIDR): National Science Foundation Cooperative Agreement MCNC University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Other U.S.  Government agencies   Mailing Lists (WAIS, Inc. and CNIDR):
Moderated, digested biweekly posting about WAIS and Electronic publishing subjects.
@wais.com and wais discussion archive WAIS server   Mailing Lists (WAIS, Inc. and CNIDR)
This is for talking about nitty gritty details of protocols and implementations.
News groups (WAIS, Inc. and CNIDR)
wais talk archive WAIS server   Protocols (WAIS, Inc. and CNIDR):
What it runs over: The freeware runs over tcp/ip.
Production versions have worked over x.25 and modems as well.
Other NIR tools this interworks with: Gopher and WWW have been used as front ends to WAIS.
freeWAIS: Z39.50 1992 compliance, search engine independence
1 617 234 1000 Server software available from: Thinking Machines Corp.
245 First Street Cambridge, MA  02145 Location of more information:
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics: Software that runs on CM2 Connection Machines to make them into WAIS servers.
1 919 248 1499 Server software available from:
ftp://pub/NIDR.tools/freewais @ftp.cnidr.org gopher://gopher.cnidr.org http://cnidr.org Location of more information:
Approximate number of such servers in use:
databases are registered and freely accessible.
Source code freely available for use and modification.
Internet community contributes to the software development, CNIDR incorporates these developments into the freeWAIS releases.
1 919 248 1499 Client software available from: URL:ftp://pub/NIDR.tools/freewais @ftp.cnidr.org
Many clients of varying capability available for most popular computing platforms General comments: Clients developed and updated regularly; check mailing lists or ftp sites for latest information
Client software available from: /pub/freeware/next@wais.com via anonymous FTP Location of more information:
WAIS client for Windows and Windows Sockets General comments:
Windows WAIS Client for Windows Sockets supporting multiple source
advanced program/viewer launching embedded (any file size) text viewer auto keyword highlighting graphics viewers included
auto browse mode for redirected source queries auto parsing of WAIS catalogs returned by servers
runs on wide range of winsock TCP/IP stacks Future
Client software available from: /pub/freeware/unix src/wais 8 b5.1 swais patches
@wais.com Location of more information
: telnet to quake.think.com log in as wais.
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
Client software available from: /pub/freeware/mac/HyperWais
@wais.com Location of more information:
contact author Latest version number: 1.9 Brief Scope and Characteristics:
HyperWais is a hypercard implementation of a WAIS client.
Its main characteristic is that it allows the user to remodel the interface completely to their liking.
Requires system 7.0 or greater.
Client software available from: Location of more information:
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
Client software available from:  /pub/freeware/dos/pc.wais @wais.com Location of more information:
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
DOS (Clarkson packet driver and Erick Englke's WATT/TCP)
Client software available from: /pub/tcpip/pcwais.zip@hilbert.wharton.upenn.edu Location of more information:
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
Client software available from: avs modules/data input/
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
Client software available from: /pub/freeware/rs6000/wais 8 b3 dist.tar.Z@wais.com Location of more information:
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
The details are correct, but I must point out that this version of WAIS is most outdated.
I'd suggest replacing it with AIX ports of the wais
Demonstration sites: List of sites which are willing to act as demonstration sites for this application.
telnet cnidr.org login as demo select #2 (Demos of NIDR software) select #2 (WAIS) (this is the worst of all possible interfaces since it is just a dumb terminal interface)
current overview "WAIS Server, WAIS Workstation, and WAIS Forwarder for UNIX Technical Description", Release 1.1, December, 1993.
Available via anonymous ftp: /pub/wais inc doc/msWord/Tech description  1.1.sit.hqx @ftp.wais.com
"Interfaces for Distributed Systems of Information Servers", Brewster Kahle, Harry Morris, Jonathan Goldman (Thinking Machines Corporation), Thomas Erickson (Apple Computer), John Curran (NSF Network Service Center), March, 1992.
(formally named "Interfaces for Wide Area Information Servers") Available via anonymous ftp: /pub/wais inc doc/txt/Interfaces.txt@ftp.wais.com or WAIS server wais discussion
archives.src   instructions to information providers See the documentation in the release: /pub/freeware/unix src/wais 8 b5.1.tar.z@wais.com or the wais
The Mac interface WAIStation has a user manual.
The unix commands have man pages.
training materials tutorials canned demos Macintosh demostration screen movie:
Steve Cisler of Apple put together a short screen recorder movie for seeing some of what WAIStation does.
Available via anonymous FTP: /pub/wais doc/WAIStation Canned Demo.sit.hqx@wais.com sample session (screen dumps) "
WAIStation, A User Interface for WAIS", February 1991, Thinking Machines technical report TMC 203.
User interface documentation with screen shots.
videos Available in special circumstances.
: "WAIS Bibliography", WAIS Inc, (last update) September 1993.
Available via anonymous ftp: /pub/wais inc doc/txt/WAIS bibliography.txt @wais.com or WAIS server wais discussion
NIR Tool Name: Whois Brief Description of Tool:
As currently defined, NICNAME/WHOIS services is a TCP transaction based query/response server, running on a few specific central machines, that provides netwide directory service to internet users.
Since the WHOIS service was defined in 1985, it has evolved into a distributed service.
The InterNIC Registration Services is located at Network Solutions, Inc., Herndon, VA, and is funded by a cooperative agreement from the National Science Foundations to provide assistance in registering networks, domains, asn's, and other entities to the Internet community via telephone, electronic mail, and U.S. postal mail.
Databases and information servers of interest to network users are provided, including the WHOIS registry of domains, networks, asn's and their associated poc's.
Gopher and Wais interfaces are also available for retrieving information and accessing whois.
Online documents maintained at registration services include registration related rfc's, registration templates, and various netinfo files.
Many of the online files are available through our automatic mail service, MAILSERV@RS.INTERNIC.NET.
Whois queries can also be directed to rs.internic.net.
From a host, use the TELNET program to connect to host RS.INTERNIC.NET.
When greeted by the Registration host, type "WHOIS" and press RETURN.
MAILSERV@RS.INTERNIC.NET is an automated service provided by InterNIC Registration Services.
It allows access to documents and information via ordinary electronic mail.
This is especially useful for users who do not have access to the NIC via a direct Internet link, such as users of BITNET, CSNET and UUCP sites.
To use the mail service, send a mail message to MAILSERV@RS.INTERNIC.NET.
In the SUBJECT field, request the type of service you wish followed by any needed arguments.
The message body is normally ignored.
Large files will be broken into smaller separate messages.
The information you request will be sent back to you as soon as possible.
Use "WHOIS HELP" for information on how to use WHOIS.
The MILNET Network Information Center, maintains the central NICNAME database and server, providing online look up of individuals, network organizations, MILNET nodes, and other information of interest to those involved in management of the Internet.
Whois queries can be sent to nic.ddn.mil.
Network Solutions AttN: InterNIC Registration Services 505 Huntmar Park Drive Herndon
(for major center as well as each client) Name:
742 4777 Level of support offered
Whois and Network Information Lookup Service (WNILS)
Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source: National Science Foundations
Other NIR tools this interworks with:
Clients: Clients are available from the source listed for server software.
VMS clients are available from TVG/Multinet Most TCP/IP networking packages for personal computers include a whois client.
h rs.internic.net "name" where "name" is the name of a person.
Full file name:  /archive/ietf wnils/Discussion.
: RFC 954 Internet Drafts:
draft ietf wnils whois 01.txt draft ietf wnils whois 02.txt draft ietf wnils whois lookup 00.txt draft huitema solo 00.txt Please check the 1id abstracts.txt listing contained in the internet drafts Shadow Directories on nic.ddn.mil, nnsc.nsf.net, nic.nordu.net, ftp.isi.edu, or
munnari.oz.au to learn the current status of any Internet Draft.
The WWW project merges the techniques of networked information and hypertext to make an easy but powerful global information system.
W3 uses the concept of a seamless information space (the "web"), in which all objects including those accessed by earlier protocols (wais, gopher, ftp, etc.) exist.
The project allows information sharing within internationally dispersed teams, and the dissemination of information by support groups.
Originally aimed at the High Energy Physics community, it has spread to other areas and attracted much interest in user support, resource discovery and collaborative work areas.
It is currently the most advanced information system deployed on the Internet.
The WWW world consists of documents, and links.
Indexes are special documents which, rather than being read, may be searched.
The result of such a search is another ("virtual") document containing links to the documents found.
A simple protocol (" HTTP ") is used to allow a browser program to request a keyword search by a remote information server.
The web contains documents in many formats.
Those documents which are hypertext, (real or virtual) contain links to other documents, or places within documents.
All documents, whether real, virtual or indexes, look similar to the reader and are contained within the same addressing scheme.
To follow a link, a reader clicks with a mouse (or types in a number if he or she has no mouse).
To search and index, a reader gives keywords (or other search criteria).
These are the only operations necessary to access the entire world of data.
The WWW browsers can access many existing data systems via existing protocols (FTP, NNTP) or via HTTP and a gateway.
In this way, the critical mass of data is quickly exceeded, and the increasing use of the system by readers and information suppliers encourage each other.
Providing information is as simple as running the W3 server and pointing it at an existing directory structure.
The server automatically generates the hypertext view of your files to guide the user around.
To personalize it, you can write a few SGML hypertext files to give an even more friendly view.
Also, any file available by anonymous FTP, or any internet newsgroup can be immediately linked into the web.
The very small start up effort is designed to allow small contributions.
At the other end of the scale, large information providers may provide an HTTP server with full text or keyword indexing.
This may allow access to a large existing database without changing the way that database is managed.
Such gateways have already been made into Oracle(tm), WAIS, and Digital's VMS/Help systems, to name but a few.
The WWW model gets over the frustrating incompatibilities of data format between suppliers and reader by allowing negotiation of format between a smart browser and a smart server.
This should provide a basis for extension into multimedia, and allow those who share application standards to make full use of them across the web.
This summary does not describe the many exciting possibilities opened up by the WWW project, such as efficient document caching.
The reduction of redundant out of date copies, and the use of knowledge daemons.
There is more information in the online project documentation, including some background on hypertext and many technical notes.
GETTING STARTED You can bootstrap yourself into the web by telnetting to info.cern.ch (no user or password).
You can try a full screen interface "Lynx" by telnetting to ukanaix.cc.ukans.edu, login in as "www".
You can also find out more about WWW in this way.
These are the least sophisticated browsers
remember that the window oriented ones are much smarter!
It is much more efficient to install a browser on your own machine, and you have many more facilities.
If you have an X windows based workstation, PC or Mac just FTP to FTP.NCSA.UIUC.EDU and get the binary of NCSA's "Mosaic" browser in directory /Web
Download it, uncompress it, set it executable, and run it.
It will tell you all you need to know.
Mosaic is now available for PCs and Apple Macs.
If you have an MSDOS machine with Windows, you could try the "Cello" browser from FATTY.LAW.CORNELL.EDU in directory /pub/LII/Cello.
The line mode browser is currently available in source form by anonymous FTP from node info.cern.ch
[currently 128.141.201.74] if you take both files /pub
(v.vv is the version number take the latest.)
Also available is a hypertext editor for the NeXT (in /pub/www/bin/next), the MidasWWW and ViolaWWW browsers for X11, an alpha test Mac browser, and and a basic server (/pub/www/src/WWWDaemon v.vv.tar.
Documentation, including the latest list of software available , is readable using www.
A plain text version of the installation instructions is included in the tar file!
Printable (postscript) documentation and articles are in /pub
(for www technical or political issues, to report bugs, to register new servers, or new software)
While CERN collaborates with all NIR and W3 development anywhere, CERN cannot provide user support for non HEP end users.
SOURCE Bodies providing development effort include HEP labs (CERN, CH; SLAC, CA, USA; FNAL, IL, USA; NIKHEF, NL; etc.), National Center for SuperComputer Applications (NCSA, IL, USA), O'Reilly Associates, (ORA, CA, USA), Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval (CNIDR, NC, USA), BSD Inc (BSD, CA, USA) and many others too numerous to mention.
Please mail new server announcements to www request@info.cern.ch.
General questions to comp.infosystems.www, please.
HTTP FTP anonymous FTP Gopher NNTP WAIS (compile time option)
Local mounted file access Telnet sessions Rlogin sessions What it runs over:   TCP/IP DECnet option.
Other NIR servers W3 clients interworks with: Techinfo, Hyper G and X.500 via gateways.
Built in capability in clients for others above Archie access via WWW "WARCHIE" archie server with direct hypertext pointers to FTP sites.
Many browsable and searchable indexes of available information, by subject (virtual libraries), and by position (geographical list of servers).
Many of these point to any form of data, HTTP or other server.
A list of such indexes is at http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/DataSources/ bySubject/Virtual libraries/Overview.html
Fast stateless file server runs over TCP/IP.
Suitable for rapid documentation navigation.
Multimedia server allows multiple file formats to be used.
File format selected for transmission based on client capabilities.
Add special functions using scripts.
Logging Approximate number of such servers in use:   600 General comments
: Some servers serve many databases.
Many tools available for serving different sorts of information Gnu info teX SGML man pages etc., as hypertext.
For more information use WWW to access
http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/Daemon/Overview.html Servers include: NCSA server    Similar feature set to CERN's httpd, support from NCSA.
A server consisting of a small C program which passes control to a server written in REXX.
Z Location of more information:
Mailing list subscription/unsubscription handling (crude) Return of documents given URL Restricts length of data returned.
Allows access to ANY document by URL unless restrictions are imposed (FTP, news, etc., included).
When hypertext messages are retrieved, the links are numbered like [1] and a list of URLs of referenced documents is appended to the document.
Send message containing HELP to listserv@info.cern.ch for details.
Approximate number of such servers in use:   1 ( 3?)
General comments Extends potential readership of W3 information to anyone with email, so an important step for universal readership.
A full list of client software is kept in http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/Clients.html and is not repeated here, as the list is constantly changing.
Telnet to info.cern.ch to see the list.
Only the Line Mode Browser, lynx and Mosaic are covered here.
Even a hard copy terminal.
Written in portable C. Primary Contact:
The LineMode Browser is suitable for use on dumb terminals, requiring no control sequences except for carriage return and line feed.
It is also of course useable from terminal emulators in workstation windows.
It can also be used as a text formatter, as part of a mail server, and as a general information retrieval tool.
History list, Back/Next/Previous/Home navigation, ability to print or save documents (or pipe to shell commands on unix).
General comments: Very stable product which has many uses apart from interactive use.
files from hypertext marked files, etc.
Source release requires W3 library product.
Future enhancements to include tracing of many links.
Demonstration sites: telnet info.cern.ch or telnet 128.141.201.74 (SWITZERLAND)
telnet vms.huji.ac.il or telnet 128.139.4.3 (www)
Computer Center, University of Kansas, Lawrence KS,
1 913 864 0485 Client software available from: ftp2.cc.ukans.edu in directory /pub/lynx.
Lynx clients provide a user friendly hypertext interface to all of the major internet protocols for character cell (vt100) terminal users on UNIX and VMS platforms.
Lynx natively understands Gopher, HTTP, WAIS, FTP, NNTP (USENET NEWS) and CSO protocols and can transparently retrieve information using any of them.
Lynx can also launch telnet and tn3270 sessions and has support to run executable programs on the local machine so that it can be used as a menuing system.
Lynx is a part of the World Wide Web (WWW) project and has all of the features of a WWW client including HTML support and HTML  forms support.
Additional resource types such as Archie Techinfo, X.500, and Hytelnet may be also accessed through HTTP and Gopher gateway functions.
Future plans: Development of a DOS (non windows) version.
telnet ukanaix.cc.ukanse.du login as "www" Documentation:   current overview
about lynx/about lynx.html   user manuals
main.html   miscellaneous documents tar file of all documentation: ftp://ftp2.cc.ukans.edu/pub/lynx/lynx help files.tar.
Z Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source: Academic Computing Services University of Kansas
Sun, DEC, IBM, SGI, HP, others.
1 217 244 0765 Client software available from: ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu in /Web/Mosaic.
Location of more information: ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu in /Web
/mosaic, and online, within Mosaic.
docs.html Latest version number:  1.1 Brief Scope and Characteristics:
NCSA Mosaic for the X Window System is a client interface to a wide variety of networked information systems, including World Wide Web, Gopher, WAIS, FTP, Usenet News, Archie, Techinfo, X.500, Hytelnet, Telnet, NCSA Data Management Facility, CSO ph/qi and others.
It offers a Motif based point and click X interface with support for plaintext, formatted text, and embedded images; hyperlinks can also refer to images, video sequences, audio clips, PostScript files, etc.
Mosaic also offers substantial interaction and collaboration facilities, including global history tracking, text and voice annotations, group/community wide annotations, and more.
Sponsoring Organisation: National Center for Supercomputing Applications Future plans: Enhancement of the NCSA Mosaic environment to support advanced networked information systems and collaboration capabilities; development of clients on other architectures; research and development into intelligent agent style user assistance mechanisms and novel navigation and representation strategies for dense, dynamic distributed information spaces.
(This is all dependent upon funding, of course.)
Beta test versions of Mac and Microsoft Windows 3.1 were released in the fall of 1993.
See individual sections on clients.
Documentation: All the W3 documentation available is in the web.
Some is also dumped off into postscript.
/WWW/TheProject.html see also http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/SDG/Software/Mosaic/Docs/help about.html executive summary http://info.cern.ch./hypertext/WWW/Summary.html instructions to information providers
Frequently Asked Questions http://info.cern.ch./hypertext/WWW/FAQ/List.html user manuals See under individual products.
training materials Illustrated talk on WWW including transparencies: see ftp://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/Talks/General/html see
Bibliography: For latest list, see:
Bibliography for the World Wide Web WORLD WIDE WEB
BIBLIOGRAPHY This lists papers and articles about the W3 initiative and related matters which you may want to pick up for background reading or quote as references.
You can of course also quote any page you read with W3 by its document address.
The FTP server info.cern.ch has some of these in /pub/www/doc.
All WWW working notes and specs are on the web.
If it is not there somewhere, it may not be anywhere.
Seek and ye shall find.
And if ye don't, mail someone to fix it.
X.500 White Pages Date completed or updated: 10 March, 1994
NIR Tool Name: X.500 Brief Description of Tool: X.500 is an international standard designed to provide a distributed global directory service.
It is primarily used today to provide 'White Pages' services, although other types of services which have directory components (automated mail aliasing, for example) are beginning to be run over X.500.
In addition to information about people and organizations, the Directory also contains a pilot K 12 Directory, pilot Information Resource information, and some other non White Pages information.
X.500 contains a number of security features, which are implemented on different paradigms in the various servers.
User's View: Users (either human or electronic) run a client program to connect to a local X.500 server.
Since X.500 is distributed, it appears that the entire global X.500 directory is available from the local server.
From this server connection, the user can add, delete, or modify information held by the Directory, or issue powerful search commands to locate individuals or other information.
The first solid version of the X.500 protocol was released in 1988, and has been the subject of much research in the past 5 years.
Consequently, there are a large number of clients, for almost every platform, and a healthy number of servers.
There are mail interfaces to some parts of the X.500 directory, and there is a X.500 to Gopher gateway.
An X.500 interface to archie is currently under development, as well as an X.500 to WWW interface.
Information Provider's View: X.500 provides a set of mechanisms to allow distributed location of, maintenance of, and access to a large set of data.
However, current servers force a hierarchical view on the location of the data, so it may not be suitable for all applications.
Also, the X.500 directory is today unable to provide access to information at a rate which would allow 'real time' applications (such as keeping routing information in the directory).
Also, there is a great effort underway to reduce the startup costs of X.500 access by providing a lightweight X.500 access protocol for client server applications.
This work is detailed in RFC 1487:
"Lightweight Directory Access Protocol", by Yeong, Howes, and Kille.
This protocol is expected to make the cost of entry for a service provider much less that it has been.
X.500 allows information to be served in an attribute:value paradigm, with related attributes grouped into 'objects'.
Each entry in the directory can be described by multiple objects.
Attributes can have values which are text strings, dereferenceable file names, or text encoded photographs, and experimentation is underway to keep digitally encoded sounds in the directory.
: X.500 encompasses a great number of clients and as a distributed system does not have a central help line.
Please see the Documentation section for pointers to servers, clients, and associated help lines.
Related Working Groups: IETF's OSI DS (OSI Directory Services)
IETF's IDS (Integrated Directory Services)
OSI Implementor's Workshop's DS SIG (Directory Services SIG)
RARE's WG NAP (Network Application Support)   Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source: Not Applicable
Mail list for IDS working group.
Other NIR tools this interworks with: Gateways to Gopher and WWW.
A full list of servers and clients is available in FYI 11, RFC 1292, "A guide to available X.500 Implementations".
See the Documentation section for the location of this document.
However, the most widely deployed server is listed here for convenience.
44 81 332 9019 Location of more information:
IC R1 (ISODE consortium version)
Approximate number of such servers in use: 400   Demonstration sites:
telnet to paradise.ulcc.ac.uk login as dua   Documentation:
Document Title: FYI 11, RFC 1292, "Catalog of Available X.500 Implementations", R. Lang, R. Wright.
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
An update of this document is in preparation: Document Title: "A Revised Catalog of Available X.500 Implementations", A. Getchell, S. Sataluri.
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
ds.internic.net Full file name: draft ietf ids catalog 00.txt
Document Title: FYI 13, RFC 1308, "Executive Introduction to directory services using the X.500 protocol", C. Weider,
J. K. Reynolds Location details:
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
RFC 1308.txt Document Title: FYI 14, RFC 1309, "Technical Overview of Directory Services using the X.500 protocol", C. Weider, J. K. Reynolds, S. Heker.
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
RFC 1309.txt Document Title: RFC 1430, "A Strategic Plan for Deploying an Internet X.500 Directory Service", S. Kille, E. Huizer, V. Cerf, R. Hobby, S. Kent.
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
RFC 1430.txt Document Title: FYI 21, RFC 1491, "A Survey of Advanced Usages of X.500", C. Weider, R. Wright.
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
RFC 1491.txt Document Title: RFC 1487, "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol", W. Yeong, T. Howes, and
S. Hardcastle Kille Location details:
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
RFC 1487.txt Document Title: RFC 1588, "WHITE PAGES MEETING REPORT", J. Postel,
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
These documents contain pointers to the rest of the literature.
This section contains information about the various groups working in the area of networked information retrieval.
The groups are listed alphabetically within their overall groupings (CNI, IETF, RARE, etc.).
CNI Groups Date template updated or checked:
(CNI) Sponsoring Organisation: Association of Research Libraries (ARL), CAUSE, and EDUCOM Working subgroups:
The Coalition for Networked Information was founded in March 1990 to help realize the promise of high performance networks and computers for the advancement of scholarship and the enrichment of intellectual productivity.
The Coalition is a partnership of the Association of Research Libraries (ARL), CAUSE, and EDUCOM.
ARL is dedicated to equitable access to, and effective use of, recorded knowlege in support of teaching, research, scholarship, and community service, and CAUSE and EDUCOM are dedicated to different aspects of the introduction, use, and management of information technology and related resources in research and education in general and higher education in particular.
The Coalition pursues its mission with the assistance of a task force that provides a common vehicle by which more than 190 institutions and organizations are exploring a shared vision of how information management must change in the 1990s to meet the social and economic opportunities and challenges of the 21st century.
Members of the Coalition Task Force include, among others, higher education institutions, publishers, network service providers, computer hardware, software, and systems companies, library networks and organizations, and public and state libraries.
A truly diverse collaboration of institutions and organizations.
Coalition for Networked Information 21 Dupont Circle, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20036
Joan K. Lippincott Email address:
Craig A. Summerhill Email address:
subscribe cni bigideas <lastname> <firstname
CNI Big Ideas Project Forum   Address:
subscribe cni copyright <lastname> <firstname
Copyright and Intellectual Property Forum
subscribe cni directories <lastname> <firstname
subscribe cni legislation <lastname> <firstname
subscribe cni management <lastname> <firstname
subscribe cni modernization <lastname> <firstname
CNI Modernization of Scholarly Publication Working Group Forum   Address:
subscribe cni transformation <lastname> <firstname
The Coalition relies on the publication programs of its parent organizations (ARL, CAUSE, and EDUCOM) to disseminate printed information on the Coalition's projects and programs.
Information on the Coalition's program is also disseminated via electronic mailing lists on the network.
(CNI) Working subgroups Name of subgroup:
Z39.50 Interoperability Testbed Mailinglist Address:
Description of main group: Program priorities are 1) to facilitate a consistent and complete mechanism for linking bibliographic, abstracting, and indexing files to files of their associated source materials; 2) a single standard for the transmission of bitmapped image files; 3) protocols for handling networked requests for delivery of source materials; 4) mechanisms for interorganizational authentication, accounting, and billing; and 5) to integrate lessons drawn from the experience of pilot projects that exercise networked printing utilities and 6) to provide an "interoperability workshop" to specify, implement, and test advanced functions of Z39.50 to accelerate the pace and to ensure the quality of standardization efforts in this area.
Office of the President University of California 300 Lakeside Dr., 8th Floor Oakland, CA
SUB cni architecture Lastname Firstname Archive:
70/CNI Working Group Forums/ cni architecture/
: This group recognizes the need for open systems, standards, and therefore, interoperable products and services based upon a distributed architecture of servers that draw upon a common or at least comparable set of data elements.
It is creating a (printed and networked) directory of directories and resource information services that provide qualitative (consumer) as well as descriptive information.
The group supports the Library of Congress effort to enhance the MARC formats to account for the cataloging requirements of networked resources and services, and the National Science Foundation effort to procure a new NSFNet Network Information Center.
Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval Center for Communications at MCNC PO Box 12889, 3021 Cornwallis Road Research Triangle Park, NC  27709
Scribner Library Skidmore College North Broadway Saratoga Springs, NY 12866
1 518 584 5000 ext.
Coalition for Networked Information (CNI) Directories and Information Resource Services Working Group Working subgroups: Name of subgroup: Mailinglist Address:
Description of main group: (from ARL Newsletter #164   September 9, 1992)
The Coalition's TopNode Project is creating a directory of directories, catalogs and aids of networked information resources, services and tools.
The project is intended to facilitate the network navigational duties, responsibilities and tasks of staff in libraries, computer centers, networking offices and other similar operations.
The primary product of the TopNode project will be a set of records describing these networked information resources, records that can be loaded into a wide range of database management systems.
Based on their response to a Call for Statements of Interest and Experience, Indiana University and Merit Network, Inc.
were chosen to lead the development effort on the Coalition TopNode project.
Pete Percival, Manager, Academic Information Environment at Indiana University and Craig Summerhill, Coalition Systems Coordinator, have completed the design for the database structure which is being built on the Coalition's Internet fileserver using BRS/SEARCH.
Based on earlier work of the leaders of the Directories and Resource Information Services Working Group, George Brett II of the University of North Carolina General Administration and Peggy Seiden of Skidmore College Library, Percival and Summerhill have developed a data structure that they believe to be both flexible and responsive to the needs of the many interested parties who have been consulted.
Under the direction of Gary Charbonneau of the Indiana University Libraries, records are being created and prepared for loading.
A thesaurus of added descriptor terms is being maintained.
As of mid August 1992, close to 200 records had been verified and had received descriptive cataloging.
When the database is complete, libraries will be alerted and encouraged to mount the TopNode records into their online catalogs.
Records will be available from the Coalition.
In addition, MERIT will use the TopNode database in an experiment to test the viability of the X.500 directory format standard for providing yellow pages type services (e.g., with subject access).
After its initial release, the database will be maintained by Indiana University libraries on the Coalition server; BRS has assisted in the development of procedures for online data entry.
Status Report TopNode Directory of Directories.
Presented at Coalition's 1992 Fall Task Force meeting, Landsdowne VA site:
gopher.cni.org/ Coalition FTP archives / Coalition Projects /
The Coalition has an alpha implementation of Topnode setup using the BRS/SEARCH full text information retrieval software.
This database was created during the data element definition portion of the project, so the data may not be of production level service quality.
Mailinglist Address: Description of main group: Several user friendly client server software tools have  been developed recently for locating and retrieving information published on computer platforms reachable over wide area data communications networks like the Internet.
Among them, freeWAIS (freely available wide area information system), the Internet Gopher, archie, and the WorldWide Web (WWW) have become popular.
freeWAIS, archie, and Gopher indicate where information of interest is likely to reside and then assist the user in locating specific information.
WWW permits a user to thread a path through the network by selecting tagged hypertext items.
While focused on the evolution of wide area information retrieval systems, the Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval (CNIDR) works closely with developers of other tools toward providing compatibility, consistency, and, to the extent possible, convergence of the tools.
Specific activities are to provide a central focus and forum for networked information discovery and retrieval (NIDR) tools and to minimize the divergence of individual implementations by providing a repository for the collection, evaluation, and distribution of protocol compliant releases and enhanced versions.
CNIDR participates in standards and policy associations such as the Internet Engineering Task Force and the Coalition for Networked Information, with the goal of increasing consensus among developers and exploring appropriate uses of networked information.
CNIDR also actively promotes the use of networked information discovery and retrieval tools at many national and international conferences to inform and educate implementors and end users.
Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval (CNIDR) Center for Communications at MCNC PO Box 12889, 3021 Cornwallis Road Research Triangle Park, NC  27709
Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval (CNIDR) Center for Communications at MCNC PO Box 12889, 3021 Cornwallis Road Research Triangle Park, NC  27709
Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval (CNIDR) Center for Communications at MCNC PO Box 12889, 3021 Cornwallis Road Research Triangle Park, NC  27709
e mail sent to this address will receive an automated response containing more information about current CNIDR activities.
Subscribers receive brief overview of project and information on how to access archives.
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is the protocol engineering, development and standardisation arm of the Internet.
It has grown to be a large open international community of network designers, operators, vendors and researchers concerned with the evolution of the Internet protocol architecture and the smooth operation of the Internet.
IETF Information including RFCs and Internet Drafts is available by anonymous FTP from several sites.
Europe Address: nic.nordu.net Pacific Rim Address:
(The Internet Drafts on this machine are stored in Unix compressed form (.Z).)
In addition the information is available via gopher from cnri.reston.va.us under the menu item "Internet Society".
IDS Date template updated or checked: 21 October, 1993
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
NONE Description of main group:
The Integrated Directory Services Working Group (IDS) is chartered to facilitate the integration and interoperability of current and future directory services into a unified directory service.
This work will unite directory services based on a heterogeneous set of directory services protocols (X.500, WHOIS , etc.).
In addition to specifying technical requirements for the integration, the IDS group will also contribute to the administrative and maintenance issues of directory service offerings by publishing guidelines on directory data integrity, maintenance, security, and privacy and legal issues for users and administrators of directories.
Membership is open, and is not limited to IETF attendees.
A full charter for this group is available for anonymous FTP from ds.internic.net as ids charter.txt in directory ietf/ids.
1 313 971 2223 Fax:
Site: ds.internic.net or any Internet Draft Server (see sub section entitled IETF groups)
All IDS document file names start with either draft ietf disi or draft ietf ids.
Document Title: FYI 11, RFC 1292, "Catalog of Available X.500 Implementations", R. Lang, R. Wright.
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
An update of this document is in preparation: Document Title: "A Revised Catalog of Available X.500 Implementations", A. Getchell, S. Sataluri.
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
ds.internic.net Full file name: draft ietf ids catalog 00.txt
Document Title: FYI 21, RFC 1491, "A Survey of Advanced Usages of X.500", C. Weider, R. Wright.
Available for anonymous FTP from Site:
ds.internic.net Full file name: RFC 1491.txt Marine, A, X.500 Pilot Projects, June 1993.
Available as draft ietf ids pilots 00.txt from any Internet Draft server.
IIIR Date template updated or checked: 14 March, 1994
NIR Group Name:  Integration of Internet Information Resources (IIIR) Sponsoring Organisation:
Internet Engineering Task Forces (IETF)
Working subgroups:  None Description of main group:
The IIIR group was chartered in September 1992 to facilitate interoperability between and integration of the various Internet information services (Archie, Gopher, WAIS, etc.), just as the IETF was founded to facilitate the integration of various LANs running different protocols.
It will develop, specify, and align protocols to integrate the services into a single "virtually unified information service" (VUIS).
Also, where necessary for interoperability, IIIR will create technical documentation for protocols used for information services in the internet.
Membership is open, and is not limited to IETF attendees.
A full charter for this group is available via anonymous FTP from ds.internic.net as ietf/iiir/iiir charter.txt
1 313 971 2223 Fax:
Anonymous FTP, iiir/archive   Document Archive:
Site: ds.internic.net or any Internet Draft Server (see sub section entitled IETF groups).
Bibliography: Weider, Chris, and Peter Deutsch, '
A vision of an integrated Internet information service', Internet Draft, March 1993.
Available as draft ietf iiir vision 00.txt from any Internet Draft server.
Weider, Chris, 'Resource Transponders', Internet Draft, March 1993.
Available as draft ietf iiir transponder 00.txt from any Internet Draft server.
Ankelesaria, et al, 'The Internet Gopher Protocol', RFC 1436, March 1993.
Available from any RFC repository.
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)', Internet Draft, March 1993.
Available as draft ietf iiir html 00.ps from any Internet Draft server.
: This is a new area, one with lots of interesting open problems and the potential to help shape the future of information services on the Internet.
Even if you can't make the IETF meetings, you are strongly encouraged to join the group and contribute.
NIR Date template updated or checked:
Networked Information Retrieval Working Group (NIR WG)
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and RARE (Association of European Research Networks)
None Description of main group: There are many organizations and associations that have begun to focus on the proliferating resources and tools for networked information retrieval (NIR).
The Networked Information Retrieval Group will be a cooperative effort of three major players in the field of NIR: IETF, RARE, and the Coalition for Networked Information (CNI) specifically tasked to collect and disseminate information about the tools and to discuss and encourage cooperative development of current and future tools such as the archie servers, the Wide Area Information Servers (WAIS), the Internet Gopher, and the WorldWide Web (WWW).
The NIR Working Group intends to increase the useful base of information about networked information retrieval (NIR) tools, their developers, interested organizations, and other activities that relate to the production, dissemination, and support of NIR tools.
Membership is open and is not limited to attendees of the quarterly IETF meetings; the mailing list is open to all.
The NIR WG charter is available via anonymous ftp from the various IETF repositories as nir charter.txt.
To disseminate information about NIR tools and those groups working on them.
The information in the NIR Status report will be updated and new entries added as appropriate once per year.
This report will be submitted as an RFC.
Current work includes discussing the criteria for evaluating the major NIR tools available.
Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval Center for Communications MCNC PO Box 12889
3021 Cornwallis Road Research Triangle Park, NC  27709 2889
mailbase.ac.uk Directory: /pub/lists/nir/files or from any Internet Draft Server (see sub section entitled IETF groups)
Other Information: This Working Group was formed jointly in the User Services and Applications Areas of the Internet Engineering Task Force.
The RARE (Reseaux Associes pour la Recherche Europeenne)
ISUS WG (Information Services and User Support Working Group) is represented by NIR WG co chair Jill Foster.
NIR WG information is also posted to the mailing list for the ISUS WG at "wg isus@rare.nl".
More information about CNI (Coalition for Networked Information) may be obtained via anonymous ftp files from ftp.cni.org.
NISI Date template updated or checked:
Network Information Services Infrastructure (NISI)
Working Group Sponsoring Organisation: IETF Description of main group:
The NISI Working Group will explore the requirements for common, shared Internet wide network information services.
The goal is to develop an understanding for what is required to implement an information services "infrastructure" for the Internet.
Charter is online in the various IETF repositories as nisi charter.txt.
NASA Ames Research Center M/S 204 14 Moffett Field, CA 94035 1000
Internet Drafts and FYI RFCs
Bibliography: RFC 1302:  Building a Network Information Services Infrastructure RFC 1355:  Privacy and Accuracy Issues in
OSI DS Date template updated or checked: 24 February, 1994
NIR Group Name: OSI Directory Services (OSI DS)
Internet Engineering Task Forces (IETF)
NONE Description of main group:
The OSI DS group's mission is to enable building a global Directory Service based on X.500 and to facilitate its deployment on the Internet.
The primary focus is on developing agreements and technical specifications needed to make this happen.
The WG will not be directly concerned with piloting and service activities, but will liaise with such activities.
Membership is open, and is not limited to IETF attendees.
A full charter for this group is available for anonymous FTP from ds.internic.net as ietf/osids/osids charter.txt
Anonymous FTP, bells.cs.ucl.ac.uk   Document Archive:
The COSINE and Internet X.500 Schema, P. Barker, S. Kille, RFC 1274.
Replication and Distributed Operations Extensions to Provide an Internet Directory Usign X.500, S. Hardcastle Kille,
RFC 1276 Requirements to provide an Internet Directory using X.500.
Internet Engineering Task Forces (IETF)
NONE Description of main group: The Uniform Resource Identifiers Archives Working Group is chartered to define a set of standards for the encoding of system independent Resource Location and Identification information for the use of Internet information services.
There are three classes of information being standardized in this group: 1)
Uniform Resource Locators (URLs), which specify a standardized method for encoding location and access information to resources across multiple information systems, 2)  Uniform Resource Names (URNs), which specify a standardized method for encoding a unique resource identifier for a given content, and 3)  Uniform Resource Citations (URCs), which specify a standardized method for encoding information about a given instantiation of a content.
The URLs allow an information service to give a user access and location information for a resource.
The URN allows an information service to determine if the contents of two information resources are the same or not.
The URC allows an information service to select which of a number of different encodings of a resource are appropriate for a given user's retrieval capabilities, and may contain such things as file size and compression techniques.
Membership is open, and is not limited to IETF attendees.
A full charter for this group is available for anonymous FTP from ds.internic.net as /ietf/uri
Communications P.O. Box 12889 3021 Cornwallis Road Research Triangle Park North Carolina 27709
Bunyip Information Systems, Inc. 266
Neptune Dorval QUEBEC H9S 2L4 CANADA Telephone:
Site: ds.internic.net Directory: internet drafts.
All documents will start with the string draft ietf uri.
Berners Lee, Tim, 'Uniform Resource Locators', Internet Draft, March 1993.
Available as draft ietf uri url 00.ps from any Internet Draft server.
Weider, Chris and Peter Deutsch, 'Uniform Resource Names', Internet Draft, May 1993.
Available as draft ietf uri resource names 00.txt from any Internet Draft server.
WNILS Date template updated or checked: 28 February, 1994
NIR Group Name: Whois and Network Information Lookup Service (WNILS) Sponsoring Organisation:
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
Name of subgroup: Mailinglist Address:  ietf
Description of main group: This description is the current WNILS WG charter.
The Network Information Center (NIC) maintains the central NICNAME database and server, defined in RFC 954, providing online look up of individuals, network organizations, key nodes, and other information of interest to those who use the Internet.
Other distributed directory information servers and information retrieval tools have been developed and it is anticipated more will be created.
Many sites now maintain local directory servers with information about individuals, departments and services at that specific site.
Typically these directory servers are network accessible.
Because these servers are local, there are now wide variations in the type of data stored, access methods, search schemes, and user interfaces.
The purpose of the Whois and Network Information Lookup Service (WNILS) working group is to expand and define the standard for WHOIS services, to resolve issues associated with the variations in access and to promote a consistent and predictable service across the network.
: Done    Review and approve the charter making any changes deemed necessary.
Examine the particular functional needs for expanded whois directory service.
Begin work on a framework for recommendations.
Assign writing assignments for first draft of document.
12/1/93 Submit the Whois and Network Information Lookup Service Recommendations document to the IESG as an Internet Draft.
12/1/93 Submit the WHOIS  protocol document to the IESG as an Internet Draft.
12/1/93 Submit the "Architecture of the Whois  Index Service" document to the IESG as a revised Internet Draft.
12/1/93 Freeze all work on the Internet Drafts for 6 months for software development.
Membership is open to attendees of the quarterly IETF meetings; the mailing list is open to all.
The WNILS WG charter can be obtained via anonymous ftp from the Document Archive sites listed in the Networked Information Retrieval Working Group (WNILS WG) template.
Other Information: This Working Group formed jointly in the User Services and Applications Areas of the Internet Engineering Task Force.
IRTF RD Date template updated or checked:
NIR Group Name: Internet Research Task Force Research Group on Resource Discovery and Directory Service
None Description of main group:
The IRTF RD group is focused on problems of scale that will arise in resource discovery systems in the next 3 5 years.
We divide these scaling problems into three dimensions: volume of information, size of the user base, and information diversity.
Our goal is to explore techniques for dealing with these problems through a set of interrelated prototypes demonstrating advances in each of these dimensions.
Briefly, our current approaches are: deal with information diversity through a coordinated set of techniques to gather, transform, and manage entropy of data deal with user scale through large scale replication deal with information volume using a combination of views, space efficient indexing, and customization w.r.t. vocabulary, search methods, and personal user history
We expect these approaches to evolve significantly over time.
Membership of this group is closed.
We will consider new members, with two constraints.
First, the group must be kept small and focused to make substantive progress at most 4 or 5 members seems appropriate at this time.
Second, prospective members must be active resource discovery researchers, who will bring clear strengths to the group.
Prospective members should send a vitae and a one page position paper describing what they propose to do to advance the group's efforts, addressed to the group chair.
The group currently consists of: Mic Bowman (Transarc,
Peter Danzig (University of Southern California)
Udi Manber (University of Arizona)
Mike Schwartz (University of Colorado Boulder; chair)   Primary Contact(s):
Department of Computer Science University of Colorado Boulder,
The IRTF RD group has no formal mailing list or archive.
The IRTF RD group has no news groups.
The IRTF RD group has no document archive, although our paper(s) and prototype(s) are available from the members' FTP archives (see below).
Occasional updates in the Internet Monthly Report.
Bibliography: C. Mic Bowman, Peter B. Danzig and Michael F. Schwartz.
Research Problems for Scalable Internet Resource Discovery.
CU CS 643 93, Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, March 1993.
To appear, Proceedings of INET '93.
Available by anonymous FTP from ftp.cs.colorado.edu in the file pub/cs/techreports/schwartz/PostScript/RD.ResearchProblems.ps.
Z (compressed PostScript) or in the file pub/cs/techreports/schwartz/ASCII
C. Mic Bowman, Peter B. Danzig, Udi Manber and Michael F. Schwartz.
Scalable Internet Resource Discovery: Research Problems and Approaches.
CU  CS 679 93, Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, October 1993.
To appear, Communications of the ACM, 1994.
A pre publication version of this paper is available by anonymous FTP and e mail from ftp.cs.colorado.edu in the file pub/cs/techreports/schwartz/PostScript/RD.ResearchProblems.
Z (compressed PostScript) or in the file pub/cs/techreports/schwartz/ASCII/RD.ResearchProblems.
Z39.50 Implementors Group Date template updated or checked:  28 February 1994
NIR Group name: Z39.50 Implementors Group Description of main group:
The Z39.50 Implementors group (ZIG) is a volunteer organization consisting of representatives of most of the organizations in the United States and Canada that are actively engaged in implementing the Z39.50 protocol.
This includes the United States Library of Congress, The National Library of Canada, the major bibliographic utilities, many library automation vendors, and other information service providers.
The group is a volunteer effort whose meetings are open at no charge to all.
The group meets about 3 times a year and conducts its activities extensively on its mailing list which is also open to any interested party.
The group was originally formed to deal with interoperability issues among the Z39.50 implementations that were beginning to emerge in 1989 and 1990
but the group has since expanded its role and has now become the primary forum in which new features and versions of the Z39.50 are developed.
(archives of the mailing list are also available at this address.)
gopher://marvel.loc.gov/11/services/z3950   Documentation and References for the Z39.50 Protocol American National Standard Information Retrieval Application Service Definition and Protocol Specification for Open Systems Interconnection Version 2,
National Information Standards Organization, July 1992 Mark Hinnebusch
"A Primer on Z39.50 Parts 1 8", Academic and Library Computing Volume 9, Numbers 2 9, February October 1992, Meckler Corporation, Westport CN.
Mark Hinnebusch "The Z39.50 Explain Service", Campus Wide Information Systems, Volume 10, Number 1, January/February 1993, Meckler Corporation, Westport, CT.
Michael Buckland and Clifford Lynch.
THE LINKED SYSTEMS PROTOCOL AND THE FUTURE OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC NETWORKS AND SYSTEMS," Information Technology and Libraries 6:2 (June 1987), pp.
Michael Buckland and Clifford Lynch. "
NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE LINKED SYSTEMS PROTOCOL FOR ONLINE BIBLIOGRAPHICAL SYSTEMS," Cataloging and Classification Quarterly 8:3/4
(Spring 1988), pp. 15 33.
INTERSYSTEM LINKING AND DISTRIBUTED DATABASE TECHNOLOGY:
A COMPARISON OF TWO APPROACHES TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF NETWORK BASED INFORMATION UTILITIES," Proceedings of the Fourth Integrated Online Library Systems Meeting, New York, New York, May 10 11, 1989.
Learned Information, Inc., 1989), pp.
Clifford A. Lynch "LIBRARY AUTOMATION AND THE NATIONAL RESEARCH NETWORK," EDUCOM Review (Fall 1989), pp.
ACCESS TECHNOLOGY FOR NETWORK INFORMATION RESOURCES," CAUSE/EFFECT (Summer 1990), pp. 15 20.
Clifford A. Lynch; Cecilia M. Preston. "
INTERNET ACCESS TO INFORMATION RESOURCES," Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (ARIST) Volume 25.
THE CLIENT SERVER MODEL IN INFORMATION RETRIEVAL," Interfaces for Information Retrieval and Online Systems:
The State of the Art Martin Dillon, ed.
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL AS A NETWORK APPLICATION," Library Hi Tech 8:4, Issue 32 (1990), pp.
"THE Z39.50 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL PROTOCOL:
AN OVERVIEW AND STATUS REPORT," Computer Communications Review 21:1
(Sigcomm) (January 1991), pp. 58 70.
THE Z39.50 PROTOCOL: QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS.
Produced as a pamphlet by Data Research Associates (1991).
Dennis Lynch "Z39.50 Extended Services" Campus Wide Information Systems Volume 10, Number 3 May/June 1993, Meckler Corporation, Westport, CT  (ISSN 1065 0741)
An Implementor's Perspective", Resource Sharing and Information Networks Volume 8
Number 1, 1992, The Haworth Press Inc, Binghamton, NY (ISSN 0737 7797)
The Public Access Computer Systems Review 3, no. 5 (1992): 4 30.
To retrieve this article, send the following e mail message to LISTSERV@UHUPVM1 or LISTSERV@UHUPVM1.UH.EDU: GET KUNZE PRV3N5 F MAIL.
Brief Description of the Z39.50 Protocol Z39.50 is a US ANSI standard protocol for information retrieval.
It uses a client server model that allows clients ( or origins in Z39.50 terminology) to search servers (targets in Z39.50 usage) and retrieve records from remote databases.
The type and format of the data retrieved is not constrained by the protocol but is agreed to by the origin and the target.
There is a mechanism that allows popular record syntax's to be registered and then referred to by well known identifiers.
Z39.50 is an OSI application layer protocol; that is, it is designed to make use of the OSI presentation layer protocol.
It may be used with or without the presentation protocol, and below that, it is irrelevant (to the Z39.50 protocol) what protocols are used.
Most implementations of Z39.50 currently run directly over TCP/IP.
User's View: Users (either human or electronic) run client software to connect with servers to retrieve information using the Z39.50 protocol.
Many clients already exist at least in prototype version today and more are being written.
Most of the major library automation vendors have announced that they will be supporting Z39.50 in either client or server mode or both.
Many of the major information vendors either currently have or are working on implementations of Z39.50 for their systems.
There are also a couple of Z39.50 implementations that are expected to be put in the public domain at some point.
The recently announced FREEWAIS software incorporates Z39.50 Version 2 into it (the older version used a variant of the 1988 version 1 protocol).
The Library of Congress acts as the maintenance agency for Z39.50 and can be contacted for a list of registered Implementors.
Z39.50 provides a protocol mechanism for accessing remote information sources.
It defines the model for the interaction between two sides, a client and a server.
It makes no assumptions or presumptions about how the data is actually organized in the server, nor about how the data is presented to the end user by the client.
The model postulates one or more databases on the remote system that can be searched using attributes from defined search attribute sets, creating a result set.
Records can be retrieved from the result set using agreed upon record formats.
The Z39.50 protocol was designed as a general purpose search and retrieval mechanism that could be used with a wide variety of data types.
The MARC format (a format used for cataloging library material among other things) and a search attribute set suitable for bibliographic and similar types of data are registered within the current version of the standard.
It is assumed that, as the protocol begins to be used by other communities and for other types of data, other attribute sets and record syntaxes will be developed.
This process has already begun and a generic record syntax and attribute set are already under development, as well as some others, specifically those supporting chemical structures, general science and technology, and business information.
The design philosophy behind Z39.50 is that it will be used with other standards such as Postscript, SGML, ODIF (and others), to communicate a wide variety of data types, including full text, images, and many others.
RARE Groups RARE (Reseaux Associes pour la Recherche Europeenne) is the Association of European Networking Organizations and their users.
RARE's aim is to overcome national boundaries in research networking by creating a harmonized computer communications infrastructure for the European research community.
At this point in time RARE has over 40 members, most of which are national networking organizations providing networking services to their national research and education community.
RARE's technical programme is carried out by volunteers working in a number of Working Groups.
20 639 3289 E mail address RFC8222 raresec@rare.nl E mail address X.400 C nl; ADMD 400net;
NIR Group Name:  RARE Information Services and User Support Working Group Sponsoring Organisation:
RARE (Reseaux Associes pour la Recherche Europeenne)
unite@mailbase.ac.uk Description of main group: The Information Services and User Support (ISUS)
Working Group has been established by the RARE Technical Committee as one of the major working groups in the RARE Technical Programme.
ISUS is concerned with all aspects of networked information services, group communications and network user support.
It is open to all those involved in working in these areas and should include: Network User Support Staff: National and European Support Staff (whether RARE, RIPE, EARN, Eunet etc.)
Site Computing Centre Support Staff Special subject related User Support Staff Library Staff Networked Information Providers Networked Information Service Providers Application Developers
The ISUS WG mailing list will act both as a forum for discussion amongst experts in this field and as a means for disseminating information to the wider community.
The ISUS Working Group is chartered to have a very broad area of interest which is broken down into several sub areas:
This is a joint effort with the IETF and CNI.
Network Interface to everything (UNITE).
This group is starting to look at the user requirements for a single interface to the network (network information services, email, bulletin boards, etc.).
This group is a joint task force of the RARE ISUS Working Group and RARE Interactive Multimedia Working Group (mmis@mailbase.ac.uk).
charter:  anonymous ftp from mailbase.ac.uk file:  /pub/lists/
Auto subscriptions to: mailserver@rare.nl "subscribe wg isus <firstname> <lastname>" Human admin to:
General purpose mailing list for whole ISUS WG.
Bibliography: RARE Technical Report 1: User Support and Information Services in the RARE Community a Status Report.
Jill Foster RARE Technical Report 5:
A Survey of Distributed Multimedia Research, Standards and Products.
Other Information: This group was formed in May 1992 and takes over and expands on the work of the former RARE WG3 USIS Subgroup.
The group conducts most of its business by email, but meets twice a year before the European Networking Conferences.
The EARNinfo group has recently joined forces with RARE ISUS WG, they will be working together in the areas of documentation and network training.
USMARC/OCLC Date template updated or checked:  10 March 1994
rgue@seq1.loc.gov   Working Group or Organisation:  USMARC/OCLC Name of group: USMARC Advisory Group; OCLC Internet Resources Cataloging Experiment Sponsoring Organisations:
USMARC Advisory Group Working subgroups:  None Description of main group: OCLC and the Library of Congress have formed a working group to consider how libraries can create cataloging records for online information resources.
The group initiated a cataloging experiment designed to test and verify the applicability of the cataloging rules and the USMARC format for computer files.
Guidelines have been written for cataloging Internet resources and were considered by the American Library Association committee responsible for maintaining the Anglo  American Cataloging Rules.
Changes to the USMARC format were initiated to accommodate a subset of these materials (electronic data resources, such as software, electronic text, bibliographic and nonbibliographic databases).
USMARC format changes which were approved included an identification of type of file and a field for location and access of the resource (very much like a URL).
The group is continuing its work by looking at how online systems and services can be accommodated in USMARC.
This work will be done within the USMARC Advisory Group of the American Library Association, which considers changes to the USMARC formats.
Data elements will be defined with mapping to MARC fields; in some cases new fields will be proposed.
This will be accomplished in conjunction with efforts by other working groups (e.g., Government Information Locator Service, or GILS).
A proposal was presented and approved in February 1994 to the USMARC Advisory Group to add data elements to the Electronic Location and Access Field
Included among these was a subfield for URL (Uniform Resource Locator).
It is intended to be used instead of or in addition to other data identifying location of and access to a networked information resource.
Membership is closed at this point.
University of Chicago Library, 1100 E. 57th St., Chicago, IL 60637
1 800 848 5878 Fax:
Documents available: 94 2.doc (Proposal 94 2: Addition of Subfields $g and $3 to Field 856 Electronic Location and Access) in the USMARC Holdings/Bibliographic Formats:   Document)
(Cover sheet with status information)
(Proposal 94 3: Addition of Subfield $u (Uniform Resource Locator) to Field 856 in the USMARC Holdings/Bibliographic Formats: Document)
(Cover sheet with status information)
(Proposal 93 4: Changes to the USMARC Bibliographic Format (Computer Files) to Accommodate Online Information Resources: Document)
Cover sheet with status information) dp69.doc (Discussion Paper
Accommodating Online Systems and Services within USMARC: Document) dp69.cov (Discussion Paper
69: Cover sheet with status information)
Location details Telnet to: marvel.loc.gov Login: marvel
Select: Services to Libraries and Publishers Select:
USMARC Listserv See list of documents  or  Site:
listserv@sun7.loc.gov Send email message with get usmarc 93
4.cov get usmarc dp69.doc get usmarc dp69.cov etc.
"Assessing Information on the Internet: Toward Providing Library Services for Computer Mediated Communication".
OCLC Online Computer Library Center, 1993.
Available in print form from OCLC, Inc. for $20 or electronically from:
ftp.rsch.oclc.org /pub/internet resources project/report Filenames:  .
Proposal 94 2: Addition of Subfields $g and $3 to Field 856 Electronic Location and Access) in the USMARC Holdings/Bibliographic Formats)
Proposal 94 3: Addition of Subfield $u (Uniform Resource Locator) to Field 856 in the USMARC Holdings/Bibliographic Formats Discussion Paper
Accommodating Online Systems and Services in USMARC
(Washington: Library of Congress, Network Development and MARC Standards Office, Apr. 1993).
Changes to the USMARC Bibligraphic Format (Computer Files) to Accommodate Online Information Resources
(Washington: Library of Congress, Network Development and MARC Standards Office, Nov. 1992
Security Considerations Security issues are not discussed in this memo.
A NIR TOOL Template (last updated 22.12.93) Purpose and scope: This template is to be used to collect the information necessary to identify and track the development of networked information retrieval tools.
It is intended that the main part of this will be completed by the main individual responsible for the tool.
Sections of the template may require completion by others.
The NIR tools included are defined by enumeration.
CNI NIR WG welcome suggestions for others to be included.
Alex archie gopher Hytelnet Netfind Prospero Veronica
WHOIS World Wide Web  (including Mosaic)
: Please complete this template and return it to Jill.Foster@newcastle.ac.uk (NIR WG co chair).
Receipt of your message will be acknowledged.
Please imbed descriptive text by at least one more column than the heading for that item:
For example: Brief description of tool: This is the best application ever seen.
It makes finding information very easy.
This is the decription imbedded one more column.
Updates: updates to existing information on NIR Tools
may be sent by the appropriate contact person at any time to: nir updates@cnidr.org
The full report will be updated annually and will form the basis of a "snapshot" report on the activities in the area of networked information retrieval (NIR).
x  cut here  x  Date template updated or checked: (e.g., 02 November, 1992)
This should be a maximum of 100 line description which should cover the following: overview of use, purpose, scope and characteristics user's view information provider's view information types supported (e.g., text, sound, etc.)
: [Please duplicate this section for each separate contact
May be the name of a role e.g., nirtool support or of an individual] Email address:
[for major center as well as each client if available] Name:
[May be the name of a role e.g., nirtool support or of an individual] Email address:
Telephone: Level of support offered:
[delete as appropriate] volunteer funded for experts
only all users Hours available:   Related Working Groups:
[Name only]   Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source:
[Duplicate this section for each list]
[This is optional if the group has only one mailing list]
Archive:  [Location of message archive for this list]
[Duplicate this section for each news group]
This is optional if the group has only one news group] Archive:  [Location of message archive for this news group]
What it runs over: Other NIR tools this interworks with:
[The main contact for this NIR tool should complete at least "platform" and "contact" for each server known to them.]
[If different from that of the Primary contact listed below] Platform: Primary Contact: Name:
Telephone: Server software available from: Location of more information: [Such as installation instructions copyright statements, warnings & bug reports etc.
Eventually this will be the Unique Resource Identifiers of the documents]
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
Approximate number of such servers in use: General comments:
[The main contact for this NIR tool should complete "platform" and "contact" for each server known to them.]
[If different from that of the Primary contact listed below] Platform: Primary Contact: Name:
Telephone: Client software available from: Location of more information: [Such as installation instructions copyright statements, warnings & bug reports etc.
Eventually this will be the Unique Resource Identifiers of the documents]
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
Items included here could include optional items to come.
plans for moving to international standards plans for interoperating with other NIR tools other functionality to be supported   Demonstration sites: List of sites which are willing to act as demonstration sites for this application.
[Duplicate for each site] Site name:
The following is a list of suggested items to be found in a document archive.
Note that the location pointers below could be replaced in the future by the "Uniform Resource Name".
Frequently Asked Questions   user manuals   training materials
tutorials   canned demos   sample session (screen dumps)
[Duplicate the following for each existing document as necessary]
Bibliography: [A list of a maximum of 10 key papers, books etc.
Optionally a pointer to a fuller bibliography could be given.]
Other Information: [Feel free to add other information that you feel is relevant.
This will be considered for inclusion in the report.]
APPENDIX B NIR Group Template (last updated 22.12.93)
Purpose and scope: This template is to be used to collect the information necessary to identify and track major groups that are working to promote or develop networked information retrieval.
It is intended that this will be completed by the group representative.
The groups included are defined by enumeration.
CNI NIR WG welcome suggestions for other groups to be included.
(IDS) Integration of Internet Information Resources (IIIR)
joint IETF/RARE WG Network Information Services Infrastructure (NISI)
OSI Directory Service (OSI DS)
Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) Whois and Network Information Lookup Service (WNILS)
USMARC/OCLC USMARC Advisory Group; OCLC Internet Resources Cataloging Experiment (USMARC/OCLC)
Please complete this template for your group or organisation and return it to Jill.Foster@newcastle.ac.uk (NIR WG co chair).
Receipt of your message will be acknowledged.
Please imbed descriptive text by at least one more column than the heading for that item:
For example: Description of main group: This is the most active NIR group.
This is the decription imbedded one more column.
Updates: updates to existing information on NIR Groups
may be sent by the appropriate contact person at any time to: nir updates@cnidr.org
The full report will be updated annually and will form the basis of a "snapshot" report on the activities in the area of networked information retrieval (NIR).
x  cut here  x  Date template updated or checked: (e.g., 02 November, 1992)
Working subgroups: Name of subgroup: Mailinglist Address:
[Description of the scope and purpose of the group and the current tasks being worked on.
(Recommended maximum of 100 lines.)
Please indicate whether membership is open or closed.
Include a pointer to an on line charter if appropriate]
: [Please duplicate this section for each separate contact
May be the name of a role e.g., group secretariat or of an individual] Email address:
[Duplicate this section for each list]
[This is optional if the group has only one mailing list]
Archive:  [Location of message archive for this list]
[Duplicate this section for each news group]
This is optional if the group has only one news group] Archive:  [Location of message archive for this news group]
Site: Directory:   Official Publications: [for example: Journal, Newsletter, Report Series]   Bibliography: [A list of a maximum of 10 key papers, books etc.
produced by this group on their NIR work].
[Feel free to add other information that you feel is relevant.
This will be considered for inclusion in the report.]
A summary of email lists and newsgroups dealing with
The following mailing lists are in IAFA format.
alex users is for people who just want to use Alex.
This mailing list is for people who operate and maintain archie servers.
Announcements of bug fixes, new releases and discussion of new features are carried out on this list.
Announcements of upgrades, new services, etc. are made to this list.
News and views of all things gopher.
To inform members of new version of the software, and to keep users informed of new/changed/defunct Telnet accessible sites.
To subscribe send email message to listserv@kentvm.kent.edu with no subject, and sub hytel l firstname lastname  as the body of the message.
Mailing list for sites running Netfind servers.
This mailing list is really two one way mailing lists.
Send mail to INFO PROSPERO to obtain information about Prospero, papers or the release.
Mail to INFO PROSPERO will not be passed on to subscribers.
INFO PROSPERO is also the list to which we will send status updates and information on how to obtain new releases.
Via prospero in the "#/INET/EDU/ISI/GUEST/prototype" virtual system as /sites/isi.edu/pub/prospero/mail/info prospero.arc.
This mailing list is for general discussion of Prospero, for announcements of new sites that have come on board, and for announcments of directories that people have created to organize the information already accessible.
Moderated, digested biweekly posting about WAIS and Electronic publishing subjects.
@wais.com and wais discussion archive WAIS server
This is for talking about nitty gritty details of protocols and implementations.
Mailing list for reporting bugs in freeWAIS.
General questions to comp.infosystems.www please.
All of the CNI lists are managed with the Unix Listprocessor software.
To join any of them mail to: listproc@cni.org sub cni <groupname>
All CNI list archives are available as: URL:
> URL:gopher//gopher.cni.org 70/CNI Working Group
CNI Management & Professional &
User Education Working Group Forum Address:
Subscribers receive brief overview of project and information on how to access archives.
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
WG on Integration of Internet Information Resources Address:
Anonymous FTP, iiir/archive   Mailinglist Name:
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
This mailing list is intended to act as a clearing house for discussions of Networked Information Retrieval and the active research projects in this field (eg WAIS, WWW, Gopher).
ftp://mailbase.ac.uk/pub/lists/files/nir/  or via gopher to mailbase.ac.uk
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
WG on Network Information Services Infrastructure Address:
Anonymous FTP, bells.cs.ucl.ac.uk   Mailinglist Name:
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Whois and Network Information Lookup Service Address:
This mailing list is used by the IETF Whois and Network Information Lookup Service (WNILS) working group which is defining enhancements to whois.
Auto subscriptions to: mailserver@rare.nl "subscribe wg isus <firstname> <lastname> Human admin to:
General purpose mailing list for whole ISUS WG.
RARE Multimedia Information Services Task Force Address:
Autosubscriptions to: mailbase@mailbase.ac.uk "subscribe mmis firstname lastname Human admin to: mmis
RARE Task Force on "User Network Interface
Autosubscriptions to: mailbase@mailbase.ac.uk "subscribe unite firstname lastname Human admin
Technical discussion related to representation of network information in the directory and its usage is carried out in this group.
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
Internet Anonymous FTP Archive working group Address:
This mailing list is for people who are involved in the Internet Anonymous FTP Archives Working Group of the IETF.
This group was involved in standardizing the encoding of information at anonymous FTP archives and thus is of interest to operators and users of the archie system.
It came to completion in November, 1992 and produced two documents which have been presented to the IETF as informational RFCs.
It has also been used as an informal source of announcements for project releases, a place for new comers to ask questions, etc.
This group was created to host discussions about the Wide Area Information Server Also included are information and help with the public domain release available from Thinking Machine Corp. and setting up your own WAIS server.
group was created to host discussions about the Wide Area Information Service.
It has been superceeded by the group "comp.infosystems.wais" and its use is discouraged.
This group was created to host discussions about the World Wide Web distributed hypertext information services project based at CERN in Switzerland, including discussion of the many public domain implementations of WWW clients and servers available.
This group was created to host discussions about the Gopher distributed information project, based at University of Minnesota, including discussion of the many public domain implementations of Gopher clients and servers available.
It has been superceeded by the group "comp.infosystems.gopher" and its use is discouraged.
Gopher, campus wide information systems, resource discovery, indexing, Internet Archive:
This newsgroup is for people interested in Internet related services, with a focus at the user level.
Announcements and discussions of issues related to archie are presented here, as well as discussions of more general issues relating to Internet services.
This section will be used to keep a note of NIR Tools which are considered by the NIR Group to be sufficiently well developed to include here, but that are not yet in widespread use.
Items currently included here are:
Frank Kappe Email address:fkappe@iicm.tu graz.ac.at
Hyper G Brief Description of Tool
: Hyper G is the name of an ambitious hypermedia project currently being developed as a joint effort by a number of institutes of the IIG (Institutes for Information Processing Graz) and the Computing and Information Services Center of the Graz University of Technology and the Austrian Computer Society.
Hyper G is designed as a general purpose, large scale, multi user, distributed hypermedia information system.
As such, it combines concepts of hypermedia, information retrieval systems, documentation systems with aspects of communication and collaboration, and computer supported teaching and learning.
It also provides seamless integration of other systems (e.g., World Wide Web, Gopher, WAIS) that also operate under the client/server paradigm and allows remote logins to interactive services.
In addition to hypertext links, Hyper G allows navigation through hierarchies, queries (including full text), guided tours, and is multilingual.
Hyper G is currently operated at some 10 locations throughout the world, including a University Information System at the Graz Technical University.
Clients and the server are available without fee for educational institutions, and are distributed as binaries for a number of platforms.
Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source:
Austrian Ministry of Science European Space Agency
None   Protocols: What is supported:   RPC What it runs over:   TCP/IP Other NIR tools this interworks with: gopher, WAIS
, World Wide Web Future plans: Too numerous to mention.
43 316 832551 34 Server software available from:  anon ftp from iicm.tu graz.ac.at, in directory pub/Hyper G/Server Location of more information:
see README in above directory Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
Approximate number of such servers in use: 13 General comments: Currently available as binary distribution for SUN, DEC, HP, and SGI workstations.
43 316 832551 22 Client software available from: anonymous ftp:  iicm.tu graz.ac.at:/pub/
Hyper G/UnixClient Location of more information:
Latest version number: 1.41 Brief Scope and Characteristics:
Fairly sophisticated terminal viewer with ~50 commands, multi  language user interface, history, authoring capabilities (text documents and links) and the ability to speak to gopher, World Wide Web, WAIS and to start telnet sessions.
The terminal viewer will probably remain rather stable in the future.
Our main effort now goes into the development of clients for X Windows and MS Windows.
43 316 832551 22 Client software available from: anonymous ftp:  iicm.tu graz.ac.at:/pub/
Hyper G/pc client Location of more information:
Latest version number: 1.37 Brief Scope and Characteristics:
Preliminary version of a Hyper G client for MS Windows 3.1 and Windows NT.
Currently mostly identical to the UNIX curses client.
An exception is its ability to elegantly import and export RTF text files to/from Hyper G, and its multimedia capabilities.
Demonstration sites: List of sites which are willing to act as demonstration sites for this application.
hyperg.tu graz.ac.at Access details: 'rlogin hyperg.tu graz.ac.at' or 'telnet hyperg.tu graz.ac.at', login 'info'
(rlogin has the advantage that the terminal size of xterms is handled correctly (can even be changed in the middle of a session)
Note: The same information is available through Gopher and WWW gateways.
Most of the documentation is available on line in the Graz server.
The server distribution include man pages of the additional authoring tools and utilities that are supplied with the server.
The ideas behind Hyper G are described in a number of research papers (see Bibliography).
Full file name: look in directory /pub/
Bibliography: Kappe F.: Aspects of a Modern Multi Media Information System.
IIG Report 308, IIG, Graz University of Technology, Austria, June 1991.
Available by anonymous ftp from iicm.tu
Z Kappe F., Maurer H., Sherbakov N.:
Hyper G A Universal Hypermedia System.
Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, Vol.
Also available by anonymous ftp from iicm.tu graz.ac.at:/pub/
Z Kappe F., Pani G., Schnabel F.:
The Architecture of a Massively Distributed Hypermedia System.
Internet Research: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, Vol.
10 24; Meckler (Spring 1993) Kappe F., Maurer H.: Hyper G:
A Large Universal Hypermedia System and Some Spin Offs; ACM Computer Graphics, experimental special online issue; available by anonymous ftp from siggraph.org in directory publications/May 93 online/Kappe.
A Distributed Hypermedia System; Proc.
INET '93, San Francisco, California, pp.
In principle, it uses the X.500 Directory framework to store information about the network.
This includes the network configuration, the properties of the links that connect the network elements, location of servers and their contents.
When a user looks for a particular document or s/w the above information is used to search for the object starting from the server that is "nearest" (cheapest) to the user.
The X.500 directory services is used in several stages get list of file servers get path to file servers get attributes for computing cost of paths search for file that is being sought However, under present circumstances, due to lack of deployment of network information in the directory, when information is unavailable from X.500, alternate sources/methods are used.
[Static lists of file servers, or lists of file servers from other clients (e.g., archie); Paths and/or costs are obtained from static lists or derived by other direct means (e.g., ping, traceroute); file information is sought from other servers (e.g., archie).]
User's View: A "single window" view of the public archives connected to the network.
It locates the server that contains the sought object and is near(/cheap/fast) server.
Query of files based on incomplete name is supported.
The system also supports queries based on keywords.
Information Provider's View: The information about the server contents have to be updated at a single place  namely, the local Directory Service Agent.
The Directory Service Agent makes the information globally accessible.
It is not necessary to carry out periodic updates on one or more information servers.
information types supported (e.g., text, sound, etc.)
Since the system supports query on name and keywords (not on contents) all kinds of information may be supported.
Postal Address:  AIC Sytsems Lab.
3310 Level of support offered:
The SoftPages Project Working Group   Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source:
The project is supported by: AIC Systems Lab., Sendai, Japan Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan
Technical discussion related to representation of network information in the directory and its usage is carried out in this group.
News groups: None   Protocols: What is supported:   X.500 DAP What it runs over:   LDAP over IP Other NIR tools this interworks with:
We are using the QUIPU package that is included in the ISODE system Location of more information:
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
Approximate number of such servers in use:
General comments: some new oids need to be assigned for SoftPages related objects.
Latest version number: Brief Scope and Characteristics:
The Prototype is under development and testing.
It is not (yet) available for public use.
README Location details: Site: ftp.tohoku.ac.jp
Bibliography: "The Soft Pages Project", Th.
Johannsen, G.Mansfield, OSI DS 39, February 1993.
Full file name:osi ds/osi ds 39 00.{txt
Other Information: "Optimized Document Retrieval Soft Pages Project", Th.
Johannsen, G.Mansfield, S.Noguchi, Booklet of Abstracts, The Network Services Conference '92, Pisa, November 1992.
WHOIS  Date template updated or checked: 21 October, 1993
whois  and the whois  index service Brief Description of Tool:
whois  and the whois  index service are extensions of the WHOIS protocol.
They are designed to a) subsume in a standardized fashion the many enhancements which have been added to individual WHOIS servers; b) extend the flexibility of WHOIS by enriching the query syntax, and c) provide a distributed indexing system to tie the various whois  servers into a distributed information lookup service.
The protocols describe two logically distinct types of servers that an information provider can set up.
The first type is the base level whois  server.
This contains primary information, such as entries for individual people or entries describing resources available locally.
For example, if one wished to provide a campus directory through whois , one would set up a base level whois  server that contained entries for each student.
In addition, this base level server must be able to generate 'forward knowledge' for the information it contains.
The second type of server collects the 'forward knowledge' generated by a number of base level servers, and can take a query sent to it and determine which of the base level servers it indexes might contain information relevant for the query.
A single physical server may contain both primary information and 'forward knowledge' for a number of other servers, and an index server can also index 'forward knowledge' for a number of other index servers, allowing a hierarchical mesh of index servers to be built.
For more details on the information provider's point of view, see the 'Documentation' section of this template.
The basic information model is centered on the concept of 'templates'.
A template is a collection of attribute:value pairs, where the allowable attributes are specified by the template type.
The whois  templates are based on the templates defined by the IAFA working group of the IETF.
The values associated with given attributes are not necessarily limited to text, they can be digitized sound clips, etc.
Depending on the client she uses, the user will see a connection to the local whois  base level server.
The user can ask the server for a list of templates supported by that server, and can then call up a blank version of the template so that she can fill in values for the attributes she knows.
Once she has filled in the template as much as she wants, she issues a query to the server to find all the entries which have these attribute:value pairs.
If she is not satisfied with the responses, she can then start traversing the index service to locate a server which can adequately answer her query.
In addition, if a user makes frequent use of the index service, she can set 'bookmarks' which can be used later to directly contact servers
she's found useful in the past, without having to traverse the index service again.
2001 South Huron Parkway 12 Ann Arbor Michigan 48104,
1 313 971 2223 Fax:
Bunyip Information Systems, Inc. 266
Neptune Dorval QUEBEC H9S 2L4 CANADA Telephone:
Whois Network Information Lookup Service (WNILS)
Working Group of the Internet Engineering Task Forces (IETF)
Sponsoring Organisation / Funding source:
TCP/IP Other NIR tools this interworks with: None yet.
Future plans: Providing resource location services and URN/URL mappings for GOPHER, ARCHIE, WAIS, and WWW.
Only beta versions available at this time (21 October, 1993).
(Chris Weider) for more information.
Only beta versions available at this time (21 October, 1993).
(Chris Weider) for more information.
Demonstration sites: NONE at this time (21 October, 1993)
Document Title: Architecture of the Whois  Index Service Location details: Site: gopher.ucdavis.edu
Service Document Title: Architecture of the WHOIS  Service Location details: Site: gopher.ucdavis.edu
Overview Document Title: Specifications for WHOIS Services Location details: Site: gopher.ucdavis.edu
: See the documentation section of this template.
Other Information: As this is a coming attraction, we encourage people to get in on the ground floor.
The authors of this protocol see it as potentially being a key player in any integrated Internet information architecture, and we can always use more volunteers who want to beta test code for us.
This section will contain information on Tools moved from the main body of the report as the Tool falls out of common usage.
There are no items currently in this section.
APPENDIX F Extinct Critters (Groups)
This section will be used as a historical record of groups which were once in the main body of the report, but which have since been closed.
Items in this section: IAFA Z39.50
Internet Anonymous File Archive Working Group Sponsoring Organisation:
Description of main group: This working group came to completion during the IETF meeting in November, 1992 and
two Internet drafts are are now circulating.
The archive for this mailing list is currently available on "archives.cc.mcgill.ca" via anonymous ftp in the file "pub/mailing lists/iafa".
Quebec H9S 2L4 CANADA Telephone:
Discussion list for the IAFA Working Group concerning the administration of anonymous FTP archive sites.
The archive for this mailing list is currently available on "archives.cc.mcgill.ca" via anonymous FTP in the file
Networked Information (CNI) Architectures and Standards Program Working subgroups:
Name of subgroup: Mailinglist Address:
Description of main group: Program priorities are 1) to facilitate a consistent and complete mechanism for linking bibliographic, abstracting, and indexing files to files of their associated source materials; 2) a single standard for the transmission of bitmapped image files; 3) protocols for handing networked requests for delivery of source materials; 4) mechanisms for interorganizational authentication, accounting, and billing; and 5) to integrate lessons drawn from the experience of pilot projects that exercise networked printing utilities and 6) to provide an "interoperability workshop" to specify, implement, and test advanced functions of Z39.50 to accelerate the pace and to ensure the quality of standardization efforts in this area.
Off. of the President Unv.
of California 300 Lakeside Dr.,
Implementors' list for low level discussions of protocol details.
