Abstract The BGP specification (RFC 4271) mandates a maximum BGP message size of 4,096 octets.
As BGP is extended to support new Address Family Identifiers (AFIs), Subsequent AFIs (SAFIs), and other features, there is a need to extend the maximum message size beyond 4,096 octets.
This document updates the BGP specification by extending the maximum message size from 4,096 octets to 65,535 octets for all messages except for OPEN and KEEPALIVE messages.
The BGP specification [RFC4271] mandates a maximum BGP message size of 4,096 octets.
As BGP is extended to support new AFIs, SAFIs, and other capabilities (e.g., BGPsec [RFC8205] and BGP Link State (BGP  LS) [
RFC7752]), there is a need to extend the maximum message size beyond 4,096 octets.
This document provides an extension to BGP to extend the message size limit from 4,096 octets to 65,535 octets for all messages except for OPEN and KEEPALIVE messages.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.
BGP Extended Message A BGP message over 4,096 octets in length is a BGP Extended Message.
BGP Extended Messages have a maximum message size of 65,535 octets.
The smallest message that may be sent is a BGP KEEPALIVE, which consists of 19 octets.
The BGP Extended Message Capability is a new BGP capability [RFC5492] defined with Capability Code 6 and Capability Length 0.
To advertise the BGP Extended Message Capability to a peer, a BGP speaker uses BGP Capabilities Advertisement [RFC5492].
By advertising the BGP Extended Message Capability to a peer, a BGP speaker conveys that it is able to receive and properly handle BGP Extended Messages (see Section 4).
Peers that wish to use the BGP Extended Message Capability MUST support error handling for BGP UPDATE messages per [RFC7606].
The BGP Extended Message Capability applies to all messages except for OPEN and KEEPALIVE messages.
These exceptions reduce the complexity of providing backward compatibility.
A BGP speaker that is capable of receiving BGP Extended Messages SHOULD advertise the BGP Extended Message Capability to its peers using BGP Capabilities Advertisement [RFC5492].
A BGP speaker MAY send BGP Extended Messages to a peer only if the BGP Extended Message Capability was received from that peer.
An implementation that advertises the BGP Extended Message Capability MUST be capable of receiving a message with a length up to and including 65,535 octets.
Applications generating information that might be encapsulated within BGP messages MUST limit the size of their payload to take the maximum message size into account.
If a BGP message with a length greater than 4,096 octets is received by a BGP listener who has not advertised the BGP Extended Message Capability, the listener will generate a NOTIFICATION with the Error Subcode set to Bad Message Length ([RFC4271], Section 6.1).
A BGP UPDATE will (if allowed by policy, best path, etc.) typically propagate throughout the BGP speaking Internet and hence to BGP speakers that may not support BGP Extended Messages.
Therefore, an announcement in a BGP Extended Message where the size of the attribute set plus the NLRI is larger than 4,096 octets may cause lack of reachability.
A BGP speaker that has advertised the BGP Extended Message Capability to its peers may receive an UPDATE from one of its peers that produces an ongoing announcement that is larger than 4,096 octets.
When propagating that UPDATE onward to a neighbor that has not advertised the BGP Extended Message Capability, the speaker SHOULD try to reduce the outgoing message size by removing attributes eligible under the "attribute discard" approach of [RFC7606].
If the message is still too big, then it must not be sent to the neighbor ([RFC4271], Section 9.2).
Additionally, if the NLRI was previously advertised to that peer, it must be withdrawn from service ([RFC4271], Section 9.1.3).
If an Autonomous System (AS) has multiple internal BGP speakers and also has multiple external BGP neighbors, care must be taken to ensure a consistent view within the AS in order to present a consistent external view.
In the context of BGP Extended Messages, a consistent view can only be guaranteed if all the Internal BGP (iBGP) speakers advertise the BGP Extended Message Capability.
If that is not the case, then the operator should consider whether or not the BGP Extended Message Capability should be advertised to external peers.
During the incremental deployment of BGP Extended Messages and use of the "attribute discard" approach of [RFC7606] in an iBGP mesh or with External BGP (eBGP) peers, the operator should monitor any routes dropped and any discarded attributes.
Error Handling A BGP speaker that has the ability to use BGP Extended Messages but has not advertised the BGP Extended Message Capability, presumably due to configuration, MUST NOT accept a BGP Extended Message.
A speaker MUST NOT implement a more liberal policy accepting BGP Extended Messages.
A BGP speaker that does not advertise the BGP Extended Message Capability might also genuinely not support BGP Extended Messages.
Such a speaker will follow the error handling procedures of [RFC4271] if it receives a BGP Extended Message.
Similarly, any speaker that treats an improper BGP Extended Message as a fatal error MUST follow the error handling procedures of [RFC4271].
Error handling for UPDATE messages, as specified in Section 6.3 of [RFC4271], is unchanged.
However, if a NOTIFICATION is to be sent to a BGP speaker that has not advertised the BGP Extended Message Capability, the size of the message MUST NOT exceed 4,096 octets.
It is RECOMMENDED that BGP protocol developers and implementers are conservative in their application and use of BGP Extended Messages.
Future protocol specifications MUST describe how to handle peers that can only accommodate 4,096 octet messages.
Changes to RFC 4271 [RFC4271] states "
The value of the Length field MUST always be at least 19 and no greater than 4096."
This document changes the latter number to 65,535 for all messages except for OPEN and KEEPALIVE messages.
Section 6.1 of [RFC4271] specifies raising an error if the length of a message is over 4,096 octets.
For all messages except for OPEN and KEEPALIVE messages, if the receiver has advertised the BGP Extended Message Capability, this document raises that limit to 65,535.
Addition to "Capability Codes" Registry 8.
This extension to BGP does not change BGP's underlying security issues [RFC4272].
Due to increased memory requirements for buffering, there may be increased exposure to resource exhaustion, intentional or unintentional.
If a remote speaker is able to craft a large BGP Extended Message to send on a path where one or more peers do not support BGP Extended Messages, peers that support BGP Extended Messages
, in doing so, cause an attack by discarding attributes one or more of its peers may be expecting.
The attributes eligible under the "attribute discard" approach must have no effect on route selection or installation
act to reduce the outgoing message (see Section 4) and, in doing so, allow a downgrade attack.
This would only affect the attacker's message, where 'downgrade' has questionable meaning.
incur resource load (processing, message resizing, etc.)
when reformatting the large messages.
