RFC #  822 Obsoletes:  RFC #733
(NIC #41952) STANDARD FOR THE FORMAT OF ARPA
of Electrical Engineering University of Delaware, Newark, DE  19711 Network:  DCrocker @
44 Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages PREFACE
By 1977, the Arpanet employed several informal standards for the  text  messages (mail) sent among its host computers.
It was felt necessary to codify these practices and  provide  for
those features  that  seemed  imminent.
The result of that effort was Request for Comments (RFC)
#733, "Standard for the Format of ARPA Network Text Message", by Crocker, Vittal, Pogran, and Henderson.
The specification attempted to avoid major  changes  in  existing software, while permitting several new features.
This document revises the specifications  in  RFC  #733,  in order  to  serve
the  needs  of the larger and more complex ARPA Internet.
Some of RFC #733's features failed  to  gain  adequate acceptance.
In  order to simplify the standard and the software that follows it, these features have been removed.
A  different addressing  scheme  is  used, to handle the case of inter network mail; and the concept of re transmission has been introduced.
This specification is intended for use in the ARPA Internet.
However, an attempt has been made to free it of any dependence on that environment, so that it can be applied to other network text message systems.
The specification of RFC #733 took place over the course  of one  year, using the ARPANET mail environment, itself, to provide an on going forum for discussing the capabilities to be included.
More  than  twenty individuals, from across the country, partici  pated in  the  original  discussion.
The  development  of  this revised specification has, similarly, utilized network mail based group discussion.
Both specification efforts  greatly  benefited from the comments and ideas of the participants.
The syntax of the standard,  in  RFC  #733,  was  originally specified  in  the  Backus Naur Form (BNF) meta language.
Ken L. Harrenstien, of SRI International, was responsible for  re coding the  BNF  into  an  augmented  BNF
that makes the representation smaller and easier to understand.
This standard specifies a syntax for text messages that  are sent  among  computer  users, within the framework of "electronic mail".
The standard supersedes  the  one  specified  in
ARPANET Request  for Comments #733, "Standard for the Format of ARPA
In this context, messages are viewed as having  an  envelope and  contents.
The  envelope  contains  whatever information is needed to accomplish transmission  and  delivery.
The  contents compose  the object to be delivered to the recipient.
This stan  dard applies only to the format and some of the semantics of mes  sage  contents.
It contains no specification of the information in the envelope.
However, some message systems may use information  from  the contents  to create the envelope.
It is intended that this stan  dard facilitate the acquisition of such information by programs.
Some message systems may  store  messages  in  formats  that differ  from the one specified in this standard.
This specifica  tion is intended strictly as a definition of what message content format is to be passed BETWEEN hosts.
This standard is NOT intended to dictate the internal for  mats  used  by sites, the specific message system features that they are expected to support, or any of  the  charac  teristics  of  user interface programs that create or read messages.
A distinction should be made between what the  specification REQUIRES  and  what  it ALLOWS.
Messages can be made complex and rich with formally structured components of information or can be kept small and simple, with a minimum of such information.
Also, the standard simplifies the interpretation  of  differing  visual formats  in  messages;  only
the  visual  aspect of a message is affected and not the interpretation  of  information  within  it.
Implementors may choose to retain such visual distinctions.
The formal definition is divided into four levels.
The bot  tom level describes the meta notation used in this document.
The second level describes basic lexical analyzers that  feed  tokens to  higher level  parsers.
Next is an overall specification for messages; it permits distinguishing individual fields.
Finally, there is definition of the contents of several structured fields.
COMMUNICATION FRAMEWORK Messages consist of lines of text.
No  special  provisions are  made for encoding drawings, facsimile, speech, or structured text.
No significant consideration has been given  to  questions of  data  compression  or to transmission and storage efficiency, and the standard tends to be free with the number  of  bits
For  example,  field  names  are specified as free text, rather than special terse codes.
A general "memo" framework is used.
That is, a message con  sists of some information in a rigid format, followed by the main part of the message, with a format that is not specified in  this document.
The  syntax of several fields of the rigidly formated ("headers") section is defined in  this  specification;  some  of these fields must be included in all messages.
The syntax  that  distinguishes  between  header  fields  is specified  separately  from  the  internal  syntax for particular fields.
This separation is intended to allow simple  parsers  to operate on the general structure of messages, without concern for the detailed structure of individual header fields.
Appendix  B is provided to facilitate construction of these parsers.
In addition to the fields specified in this document, it  is expected  that  other fields will gain common use.
As necessary, the specifications for these "extension fields" will be published through  the same mechanism used to publish this document.
Users may also  wish  to  extend
Such "user defined fields" are permitted.
The framework severely constrains document tone and  appear  ance and is primarily useful for most intra organization communi  cations and  well structured   inter organization  communication.
It  also  can  be used for some types of inter process communica  tion, such as simple file transfer and remote job entry.
A  more robust  framework might allow for multi font, multi color, multi  dimension encoding of information.
A  less  robust  one,  as  is present  in  most  single machine  message  systems,  would  more severely constrain the ability to add fields and the decision  to include specific fields.
In contrast with paper based communica  tion, it is interesting to note that the RECEIVER  of
can   exercise  an  extraordinary  amount  of  control  over  the message's appearance.
The amount of actual control available  to message  receivers  is  contingent upon the capabilities of their individual message systems.
Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages 2.
This specification uses an augmented Backus Naur Form  (BNF) notation.
The differences from standard BNF involve naming rules and indicating repetition and "local" alternatives.
The name  of  a rule is simply the name itself, rather than "<name>".
Quotation marks enclose literal text (which may be  upper  and/or lower  case).
basic  rules  are  in uppercase, such as SPACE, TAB, CRLF, DIGIT, ALPHA, etc.
Angle brackets are used  in rule  definitions,  and  in  the rest of this  document, whenever their presence will facilitate discerning the use of rule names.
There  fore "foo / bar" will accept foo or bar.
LOCAL ALTERNATIVES Elements enclosed in parentheses are  treated  as  a  single element.
REPETITION The character " "
preceding an element indicates repetition.
The full form is: <l> <m
at least <l> and at most <m> occurrences  of  element.
Default values are 0 and infinity so that " (element)" allows any number, including zero; "1 element" requires at  least  one;  and "1 2element"
OPTIONAL Square brackets enclose optional elements; "[foo  bar]"
is equivalent to " 1(foo bar)".
SPECIFIC REPETITION "<n>(element)" is equivalent to "<n
Thus 2DIGIT is a 2 digit number, and 3ALPHA is a string of three alphabetic characters.
Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages 2.7.
#RULE:  LISTS A construct "
Wherever this construct is used, null elements are allowed, but do not  contribute  to  the  count  of  elements present.
is  permitted,  but counts as only two elements.
Therefore, where at least one  ele  ment  is required, at least one non null element must be present.
Default values are 0 and infinity so that "#(element)" allows any number,  including  zero;  "1#element" requires at least one; and "1#2element" allows one or two.
; COMMENTS A semi colon, set off some distance to
the  right  of  rule text,  starts  a comment that continues to the end of line.
This is a simple way of including useful notes in  parallel  with  the specifications.
Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages 3.
LEXICAL ANALYSIS OF MESSAGES 3.1.
A message consists of header fields and, optionally, a body.
The  body  is simply a sequence of lines containing ASCII charac  ters.
It is separated from the headers by a null line  (i.e.,  a line with nothing preceding the CRLF).
Each header field can be viewed as a single, logical  line  of ASCII  characters,  comprising  a field name and a field body.
For convenience, the field body  portion  of  this  conceptual entity  can be split into a multiple line representation; this is called "folding".
The general rule is that wherever  there may  be  linear white space
(NOT  simply  LWSP chars), a CRLF immediately followed by AT LEAST one LWSP char may instead  be inserted.
Thus, the single line To:  "Joe & J. Harvey" <ddd @Org
, JJV @ BBN can be represented as:
To:  "Joe & J. Harvey" <ddd @
"Joe & J. Harvey" <ddd@ Org>, JJV @BBN
and To:  "Joe & J. Harvey" <ddd @
The process of moving  from  this  folded   multiple line representation  of a header field to its single line represen  tation is called "unfolding".
Unfolding  is  accomplished  by regarding   CRLF
immediately  followed  by  a  LWSP char  as equivalent to the LWSP char.
Note:  While the standard  permits  folding  wherever  linear  white space is permitted, it is recommended that struc  tured fields, such as those containing addresses, limit folding  to higher level syntactic breaks.
For address fields, it  is
recommended  that  such  folding  occur Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages between addresses, after the separating comma.
The  field name must be composed of printable ASCII characters (i.e., characters that  have  values  between  33.
The field body may be composed of any ASCII characters, except CR or LF.
(While CR and/or LF may be present  in the actual text, they are removed by the action of unfolding the field.)
Certain field bodies of headers may be  interpreted  according to  an  internal  syntax  that some systems may wish to parse.
These  fields  are  called  "structured   fields".
Examples include  fields containing dates and addresses.
Other fields, such as "Subject"  and  "Comments",  are  regarded  simply  as strings of text.
Note:  Any field which has a field body
that  is  defined  as other  than  simply <text
> is to be treated as a struc  tured field.
Field names, unstructured field bodies  and  structured field bodies each are scanned by their own, independent "lexical" analyzers.
UNSTRUCTURED FIELD BODIES For some fields, such as "Subject" and "Comments",
no  struc  turing  is assumed, and they are treated simply as <text
s, as in the message body.
Rules of folding apply to these  fields, so  that  such  field  bodies  which occupy several lines must therefore have the second and successive lines indented by  at least one LWSP char.
To aid in the creation and reading of structured  fields,  the free  insertion   of linear white space (which permits folding by inclusion of CRLFs)  is  allowed  between  lexical  tokens.
Rather  than  obscuring  the  syntax  specifications for these structured fields with explicit syntax for this  linear white  space, the existence of another "lexical" analyzer is assumed.
This analyzer does not apply  for  unstructured  field  bodies that  are  simply  strings  of  text, as described above.
The analyzer provides  an  interpretation  of  the  unfolded  text Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages composing  the body of the field as a sequence of lexical sym  bols.
These symbols are:  individual special characters  quoted strings  domain literals
The first four of these symbols  are  self delimiting.
Atoms are not; they are delimited by the self delimiting symbols and by  linear white space.
For  the  purposes  of  regenerating sequences  of  atoms  and quoted strings, exactly one SPACE is assumed to exist, and should be used, between them.
(Also, in the "Clarifications" section on "White Space", below, note the rules about treatment of multiple contiguous LWSP chars.)
So, for example, the folded body of an address field ":sysmail"@  Some Group.
Some Org, Muhammed.(I am  the greatest
Internet Text Messages is analyzed into the following lexical symbols and types: :
The canonical representations for the data in these  addresses are the following strings: ":sysmail"@Some Group.
For purposes of display, and when passing  such  struc  tured information to other systems, such as mail proto  col  services,  there  must  be  NO  linear white space between  <word
Also, headers should be in a folded form.
These rules show a field meta syntax, without regard for the particular  type  or internal syntax.
Their purpose is to permit detection of fields; also, they present to  higher level  parsers an image of each field as fitting on one line.
<the ASCII characters making up the field body, as defined in the following sections, and consisting of combinations of atom, quoted string, and specials tokens, or else consisting of texts>
The following rules are used to define an underlying lexical analyzer,  which  feeds  tokens to higher level parsers.
See the ANSI references, in the Bibliography.
; (141 172, 97. 122.)
Some characters are reserved for special interpretation,  such as  delimiting lexical tokens.
To permit use of these charac  ters as uninterpreted data, a quoting mechanism  is  provided.
This mechanism is not fully general.
Characters may be quoted only  within  a subset of the lexical constructs.
However, quoting  is  PERMITTED  for  any character.
In particular, quoting is NOT permitted  within  atoms.
For  example  when  the local part of an addr spec must contain a special character, a quoted  string  must  be used.
Therefore, a specification such as:
Full\ Name@Domain is not legal and must be specified as: "Full Name"@Domain Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages 3.4.2.
In structured field bodies, multiple linear space ASCII characters  (namely  HTABs  and  SPACEs) are treated as single spaces and may freely surround any  symbol.
In all header fields, the only place in which at least one LWSP char is REQUIRED is at the beginning of  continua  tion lines in a folded field.
Exactly ONE SPACE should be used in place of arbitrary linear white space  and  comment sequences.
Note:  Within systems conforming to this standard, wherever  a member of the list of delimiters is allowed, LWSP chars may also occur before and/or after it.
Writers of  mail sending  (i.e.,  header generating)
programs should realize that there is no network wide definition of the effect of ASCII HT (horizontal tab) characters on
the  appear  ance  of  text  at another network host; therefore, the use of tabs in message headers, though permitted, is discouraged.
A comment is a set of ASCII characters, which is  enclosed  in matching  parentheses  and which is not within a quoted string The comment construct permits message originators to add  text which  will  be  useful  for  human readers, but which will be ignored by the formal semantics.
Comments should be  retained while  the  message  is subject to interpretation according to this standard.
be  included  in other  cases,
such  as  during  protocol  exchanges with mail servers.
Comments nest, so that if an unquoted left parenthesis  occurs in  a  comment  string,  there  must  also be a matching right parenthesis.
When a comment acts as the delimiter  between  a sequence of two lexical symbols, such as two atoms, it is lex  ically equivalent with a single SPACE,  for
the  purposes  of regenerating  the  sequence, such as when passing the sequence onto a mail protocol server.
Comments are  detected  as  such only within field bodies of structured fields.
If a comment is to be "folded" onto multiple lines,  then  the syntax  for  folding  must  be  adhered to.
(See the "Lexical Standard for ARPA
Internet Text Messages Analysis of Messages" section on "Folding Long Header  Fields" above,  and  the  section on "Case Independence" below.)
Note that  the  official  semantics
therefore  do  not  "see"  any unquoted CRLFs that are in comments, although particular pars  ing programs may wish to note their presence.
For these  pro  grams,  it would be reasonable to interpret a "CRLF LWSP char" as being a CRLF that is part of the comment; i.e., the CRLF is kept  and  the  LWSP char is discarded.
Quoted CRLFs (i.e., a backslash followed by a CR followed by a  LF)
still  must  be followed by at least one LWSP char.
The quote character (backslash) and  characters
that  delimit syntactic  units  are not, generally, to be taken as data that are part of the delimited or quoted unit(s).
In  particular, the   quotation marks
that   define   a  quoted string,  the parentheses that define  a  comment  and  the  backslash  that quotes
NOT  part of the quoted  string, comment or quoted character.
Note that the syntax allows any character to be quoted  within a  quoted string  or  comment; however only certain characters MUST be quoted to be included as data.
These  characters  are the  ones that are not part of the alternate text group (i.e., ctext or qtext).
The one exception to this rule  is  that  a  single  SPACE  is assumed  to  exist  between  contiguous words in a phrase, and this interpretation is independent of  the  actual  number  of LWSP chars  that  the  creator  places  between the words.
To include more than one SPACE, the creator must make  the  LWSP
chars be part of a quoted string.
Quotation marks that delimit a quoted string  and  backslashes that  quote  the  following character should NOT accompany the quoted string when the string is passed to processes  that  do not interpret data according to this specification (e.g., mail protocol servers).
Where permitted (i.e., in words in structured fields)  quoted  strings
are  treated  as a single symbol.
That is, a quoted  string is equivalent to an atom, syntactically.
If a  quoted  string  is to be "folded" onto multiple lines, then the syntax for folding must be adhered to.
(See the "Lexical Analysis of Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages Messages"  section  on "Folding Long Header Fields" above, and the section on "Case  Independence"  below.)
Therefore,  the official  semantics  do  not  "see" any bare CRLFs that are in quoted strings; however particular parsing programs
may  wish to  note  their presence.
For such programs, it would be rea  sonable to interpret a "CRLF LWSP char" as being a CRLF  which is  part  of the quoted string; i.e., the CRLF is kept and the LWSP char is discarded.
Quoted CRLFs (i.e., a backslash  fol  lowed  by
a CR followed by a LF) are also subject to rules of folding, but the presence of the quoting character (backslash) explicitly  indicates  that  the  CRLF  is  data to the quoted string.
Stripping off the first following LWSP char  is  also appropriate when parsing quoted CRLFs.
There are three types of brackets which must occur in  matched pairs, and which may NOT be nested:
indicate that the included list of addresses are to be treated as a group.
are  generally  used  to indicate  the  presence of a one machine usable refer
ence (e.g., delimiting mailboxes), possibly  including source routing to the machine.
Except as noted, alphabetic strings may be represented in  any combination of upper and lower case.
The only syntactic units Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages which requires preservation of case information are:  text  qtext  dtext
quoted pair  local part, except "Postmaster" When matching any other syntactic unit, case is to be ignored.
For  example, the field names "From", "FROM", "from", and even "FroM" are semantically equal and should all be treated ident  ically.
When generating these units, any mix of upper and  lower  case alphabetic  characters  may  be  used.
The case shown in this specification is suggested for message creating processes.
Note:  The reserved local part address unit, "Postmaster",  is an  exception.
When  the  value "Postmaster" is being interpreted, it must be  accepted  in  any  mixture  of case, including "POSTMASTER", and "postmaster".
Each header field may be represented on exactly one line
con  sisting  of the name of the field and its body, and terminated by a CRLF; this is what the parser sees.
For readability, the field body  portion of long header fields may be "folded" onto multiple lines of the actual field.
preted  to  mean greater than 65 or 72 characters.
The former length serves as a limit, when the message is to be viewed  on most  simple terminals which use simple display software; how  ever, the limit is not imposed by this standard.
Note:  Some display software often can selectively fold lines, to  suit  the display terminal.
In such cases, sender  provided  folding
can  interfere  with   the   display software.
BACKSPACE CHARACTERS ASCII BS characters (Backspace, decimal 8) may be included  in texts and quoted strings to effect overstriking.
However, any use of backspaces which effects an overstrike to the  left  of the beginning of the text or quoted string is prohibited.
During transmission through heterogeneous networks, it may  be necessary  to  force data to conform to a network's local con  ventions.
For example, it may be required that a CR  be  fol  lowed  either by LF, making a CRLF, or by <null>, if the CR is to stand alone).
Such transformations are reversed, when  the message exits that network.
When  crossing  network  boundaries,  the  message  should  be treated  as  passing  through  two modules.
It will enter the first module containing whatever network specific  transforma
that  were  necessary  to  permit migration through the "current" network.
It then passes through the modules:
The "current" network's idiosyncracies are removed and the  message  is returned to the canonical form speci  fied in this standard.
The "next" network's local idiosyncracies are  imposed on the message.
Due to an artifact of the notational conventions, the syn  tax  indicates that, when present, some fields, must be in a particular order.
NOT  required  to occur  in  any  particular  order, except that the message body must occur AFTER  the  headers.
It  is  recommended that,  if  present,  headers be sent in the order "Return  Path", "Received", "Date",
This specification permits multiple  occurrences  of  most fields.
Except  as  noted,  their  interpretation is not specified here, and their use is discouraged.
The following syntax for the bodies of various fields should be  thought  of  as  describing  each field body as a single long string (or line).
The "Lexical Analysis of Message"  section  on "Long  Header Fields", above, indicates how such long strings can be represented on more than one line in  the  actual  transmitted message.
Internet Text Messages extension field
Any field which is defined in a document published as a formal extension to this specification; none will have names beginning with the string "X "> user defined field   <
Any field which has not been defined in this specification or published as an extension to this specification; names for such fields must be unique and may be pre empted by published extensions> 4.2.
Some systems permit mail recipients to  forward  a  message, retaining  the original headers, by adding some new fields.
This standard supports such a service, through the "Resent " prefix to field names.
Whenever the string "Resent " begins a field name, the field has  the  same  semantics as a field whose name does not have the prefix.
However, the message is assumed to have
been  forwarded by  an original recipient who attached the "Resent " field.
This new field is treated as being more recent  than  the  equivalent, original  field.
For  example, the "Resent From", indicates the person that forwarded the message, whereas the "From" field indi  cates the original author.
Use of such precedence  information  depends  upon  partici  pants'  communication needs.
For example, this standard does not dictate when a "Resent From:" address should receive replies,  in lieu of sending them to the "From:" address.
In general, the "Resent " fields should be treated as con  taining  a  set  of information that is independent of the set of original fields.
set  should not  automatically be taken from the other.
The interpre  tation of multiple "Resent " fields, of the same type,  is undefined.
In the remainder of this specification, occurrence of  legal "Resent "  fields  are treated identically with the occurrence of Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages fields whose names do not contain this prefix.
TRACE FIELDS Trace information is used to provide an audit trail of  mes  sage  handling.
In  addition,  it indicates a route back to the sender of the message.
The list of known "via" and  "with"  values  are  registered with
the  Network  Information  Center, SRI International, Menlo Park, California.
This field  is  added  by  the  final  transport  system
that delivers  the message to its recipient.
The field is intended to contain definitive information about the address and  route back to the message's originator.
Note:  The "Reply To" field is added  by  the  originator  and serves  to  direct  replies,  whereas the "Return Path" field is used to identify a path back to  the  origina  tor.
While the syntax  indicates  that  a  route  specification  is optional,  every attempt should be made to provide that infor  mation in this field.
A copy of this field is added by each transport  service
The information in the field can be quite useful for tracing transport problems.
The names of the sending  and  receiving  hosts  and  time of  receipt may be specified.
The "via" parameter may be used, to indicate what physical mechanism the message
was  sent  over, such  as  Arpanet or Phonenet, and the "with" parameter may be used to indicate the mail ,  or  connection ,  level  protocol that  was  used, such as the SMTP mail protocol, or X.25 tran  sport protocol.
Note:  Several "with" parameters may  be  included,  to  fully specify the set of protocols that were used.
Some transport services queue mail; the internal message iden  tifier that is assigned to the message
may be noted, using the "id" parameter.
When the  sending  host  uses  a  destination address specification that the receiving host reinterprets, by Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages expansion or transformation, the receiving host  may  wish  to record  the original specification, using the "for" parameter.
For example, when a copy of mail is sent to the  member  of  a distribution  list,  this  parameter may be used to record the original address that was used to specify the list.
The standard allows only a subset of the combinations possi
ble  with the From, Sender, Reply To, Resent From, Resent Sender, and Resent Reply To fields.
FROM / RESENT FROM This field
contains the identity of the person(s)
who  wished this  message to be sent.
The message creation process should default this field  to
,  authenticated  machine address,  indicating  the  AGENT  (person,  system or process) entering the message.
If this is not done, the "Sender" field MUST  be  present.
If the "From" field IS defaulted this way, the "Sender" field is  optional  and  is  redundant  with  the "From"  field.
In  all  cases, addresses in the "From" field must be machine usable (addr specs) and may not contain  named lists (groups).
This field contains the authenticated identity  of  the  AGENT (person,  system  or  process)  that sends the message.
It is intended for use when the sender is not the author of the mes  sage,  or  to
indicate  who among a group of authors actually sent the message.
If the contents of the "Sender" field would be  completely  redundant  with
"From"  field,  then the "Sender" field need not be present and its use is  discouraged (
In particular, the "Sender" field MUST be present if it is NOT the same as the "From" Field.
The Sender mailbox  specification  includes  a  word  sequence which  must correspond to a specific agent (i.e., a human user or a computer program) rather than a standard  address.
This indicates  the  expectation  that  the field will identify the single AGENT (person,  system,  or  process)
responsible  for sending  the mail and not simply include the name of a mailbox from which the mail was sent.
For example in the  case  of  a shared login name, the name, by itself, would not be adequate.
The local part address unit, which refers to  this  agent,  is expected to be a computer system term, and not (for example) a generalized person reference which can  be  used  outside  the network text message context.
Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages
Since the critical function served by the  "Sender"  field  is identification  of
the agent responsible for sending mail and
since computer programs cannot be held accountable  for  their behavior, it is strongly recommended that when a computer pro  gram generates a message, the HUMAN  who  is  responsible  for that program be referenced as part of the "Sender" field mail  box specification.
REPLY TO / RESENT REPLY TO This field provides a general  mechanism  for  indicating  any mailbox(es)
to which responses are to be sent.
Three typical uses for this feature can  be  distinguished.
In  the  first case,  the  author(s) may not have regular machine based mail  boxes and therefore wish(es) to indicate an alternate  machine address.
In  the  second case, an author may wish additional persons to be made aware of, or responsible for,  replies.
A somewhat  different  use  may be of some help to "text message teleconferencing" groups equipped with automatic  distribution services:   include the address of that service in the "Reply  To" field of all messages  submitted  to  the  teleconference; then  participants  can  "reply"  to conference submissions to guarantee the correct distribution of any submission of  their own.
Note:  The "Return Path" field is added by the mail  transport service,  at the time of final deliver.
It is intended to identify a path back to the orginator  of  the  mes  sage.
The  "Reply To"  field  is added by the message originator and is intended to direct replies.
AUTOMATIC USE OF FROM / SENDER / REPLY TO For systems which automatically  generate  address
lists  for replies to messages, the following recommendations are made:   The "Sender" field mailbox should be sent  notices  of any  problems in transport or delivery of the original messages.
If there is no  "Sender"  field,  then  the "From" field mailbox should be used.
The  "Sender"  field  mailbox  should
be  used automatically, in a recipient's reply message.
If the "Reply To" field exists, then the reply  should go to the addresses indicated in that field and not to the address(es) indicated in the "From" field.
If there is a "From" field, but no  "Reply To"  field, the  reply should be sent to the address(es) indicated in the "From" field.
Sometimes, a recipient may actually wish to  communicate  with the  person  that  initiated  the  message  transfer.
In such cases, it is reasonable to use the "Sender" address.
This recommendation is intended  only  for  automated  use  of originator fields  and is not intended to suggest that replies may not also be sent to other recipients of messages.
respective  mail handling programs to decide what additional facilities will be provided.
Examples are provided in Appendix A. 4.5.
TO / RESENT TO This field contains the identity of the primary recipients  of the message.
This field contains the identity of
tional) recipients of the message.
This field contains the identity of additional  recipients  of the  message.
The contents of this field are not included in copies of the message sent to the primary and secondary  reci  pients.
Some  systems  may choose to include the text of the "Bcc" field only in the author(s)
's  copy,  while  others  may also include it in the text sent to all those indicated in the "Bcc" list.
MESSAGE ID / RESENT MESSAGE ID
This field contains a unique identifier  (the  local part address  unit)  which  refers to THIS version of THIS message.
The uniqueness of the message identifier is guaranteed by  the host  which  generates  it.
This identifier is intended to be machine readable and not necessarily meaningful to humans.
A message  identifier pertains to exactly one instantiation of a particular message; subsequent revisions to the message should Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages
each receive new message identifiers.
IN REPLY TO The contents of this field
identify  previous  correspon  dence  which this message answers.
that if message iden  tifiers are used in this  field,  they  must  use  the  msg
The contents of this field identify other  correspondence which  this message references.
Note that if message identif  iers are used, they must use the msg id specification format.
This field contains keywords  or  phrases,  separated  by commas.
This is intended to provide a summary,  or
indicate  the nature, of the message.
COMMENTS Permits adding text comments  onto  the  message  without disturbing the contents of the message's body.
Sometimes,  data  encryption  is  used  to  increase  the privacy  of
If the body of a message has been encrypted, to keep its contents private, the  "Encrypted" field  can be used to note the fact and to indicate the nature of the encryption.
The first <word> parameter  indicates  the software  used  to  encrypt the body, and the second, optional <word> is intended to  aid  the  recipient  in  selecting
This  code word may be viewed as an index to a table of keys held by the recipient.
Unfortunately, headers must contain envelope,  as  well as  contents,  information.
Consequently, it is neces  sary that they remain unencrypted, so that  mail  tran  sport   services
Since  names, addresses, and "Subject"  field  contents  may  contain Standard for
ARPA Internet Text Messages sensitive  information,  this  requirement limits total message privacy.
Names of encryption software are registered with the Net  work  Information Center, SRI International, Menlo Park, Cali  fornia.
A limited number of common fields
have  been  defined  in this  document.
As  network mail requirements dictate, addi  tional fields may be standardized.
To  provide  user defined fields  with  a  measure  of  safety,  in name selection, such extension fields will never have names  that  begin  with
Names of Extension fields are registered with the Network Information Center, SRI International, Menlo Park, California.
USER DEFINED FIELD Individual users of network mail are free to  define  and use  additional  header  fields.
Such fields must have names which are not already used in the current specification or  in any definitions of extension fields, and the overall syntax of these user defined fields must conform to this specification's rules   for   delimiting  and  folding  fields.
Due  to  the extension field  publishing  process,  the  name  of  a  user  defined field may be
X " will never  be  used  in  the names  of Extension fields.
This provides user defined fields with a protected set of names.
Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages 5.
DATE AND TIME SPECIFICATION 5.1.
; Local differential ;  hours min.
If included, day of week must be the day implied by the date specification.
Time zone may be indicated in several ways.
The  military  standard uses  a  single  character for each zone.
"A" indicates one hour earlier, and "M" indicates 12  hours
lier;  "N"  is  one  hour  later, and "Y" is 12 hours later.
The letter "J" is not used.
The other remaining two forms are  taken from ANSI standard X3.51 1975.
One allows explicit indication of the amount of offset from UT; the other uses
common  3 character strings for indicating time zones in North America.
It is a  conceptual  entity  which does  not necessarily pertain to file storage.
For example, some sites may choose to print mail on their line printer and  deliver the output to the addressee's desk.
A mailbox specification comprises a person, system  or  pro  cess name reference, a domain dependent string, and a name domain reference.
The name reference is optional and is usually used to indicate  the  human name of a recipient.
The name domain refer  ence specifies a sequence of sub domains.
The  domain dependent string is uninterpreted, except by the final sub domain; the rest of the mail service merely transmits it as a literal string.
A name domain is a set of registered (mail)  names.
domain  specification  resolves  to  a subordinate name domain specification  or  to  a  terminal  domain dependent   string.
Hence,  domain  specification  is  extensible,  permitting any number of registration levels.
Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages Name domains model a global, logical, hierarchical  addressing scheme.
The  model is logical, in that an address specifica  tion is related to name registration and
not  necessarily tied  to  transmission  path.
The  model's  hierarchy  is  a directed graph, called an in tree, such that there is a single path  from  the root of the tree to any node in the hierarchy.
If more than one path actually exists, they are considered  to be different addresses.
The root node is common to all addresses; consequently, it  is not  referenced.
Its  children  constitute "top level" name  domains.
Usually, a service has access to its own full domain specification and to the names of all top level name domains.
indicated  by  the right most field, in a domain specification.
Its child is specified to the left, its  child to the left, and so on.
Some groups provide formal registration services;  these  con  stitute   name domains   that  are  independent  logically  of specific machines.
In addition, networks and machines  impli  citly  compose name domains, since their membership usually is registered in name tables.
In the case of formal registration, an organization implements a  (distributed)  data base which provides an address to route mapping service for addresses of the form:
person@registry.organization Note that "organization" is a logical  entity,  separate  from any particular communication network.
A mechanism for accessing "organization" is universally avail  able.
That mechanism, in turn, seeks an instantiation of the registry; its location is not indicated in the address specif  ication.
It  is assumed that the system which operates under the name "organization" knows how to find a subordinate regis  try.
The registry will then use the "person" string to deter  mine where to send the mail specification.
The latter,  network oriented  case  permits  simple,  direct, attachment related address specification, such as: user@host.network
Once the network is accessed, it is expected  that  a  message will  go  directly  to the host and that the host will resolve Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages the user name, placing the message in the user's mailbox.
Since any number of  levels  is  possible  within  the  domain hierarchy,
a  fully  qualified address can become inconvenient.
This standard permits abbreviated domain specification, in a special case: For the address of  the  sender,  call
the  left most sub domain  Level  N.
In a header address, if all of the sub domains above (i.e., to the right of)
Level  N are  the same as those of the sender, then they do not have to appear in the specification.
Otherwise,  the address must be fully qualified.
This feature is subject  to  approval  by  local  sub  domains.
may  require their member systems, which originate mail, to provide  full domain  specification only.
When permitted, abbrevia  tions may be present  only  while  the  message  stays within the sub domain of the sender.
Use of this mechanism requires the sender's sub domain to reserve the names of all top level domains, so that full specifications can be distinguished from abbrevi  ated specifications.
For example, if a sender's address is: sender@registry
A.registry 1.organization X and one recipient's address is:
1.organization X and another's is:
1.organization X" need not be specified in the the  message,  but  "registry C.registry 2"  DOES  have  to be specified.
That is, the first two addresses may  be  abbrevi  ated, but the third address must be fully specified.
When a message crosses a domain boundary, all  addresses
must be  specified  in  the  full format, ending with the top level name domain in the right most field.
It is the responsibility of  mail  forwarding services to ensure that addresses conform Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages with this requirement.
In the case of abbreviated  addresses, the  relaying  service must make the necessary expansions.
It should be noted that it often is difficult for such a  service to locate all occurrences of address abbreviations.
For exam  ple, it will not be possible to find such abbreviations within the  body  of  the  message.
The "Return Path" field can aid recipients in recovering from these errors.
Note:  When passing any portion of an addr spec onto a process which  does  not interpret data according to this stan  dard (e.g., mail protocol servers).
the  above examples,   and   only  ONE  SPACE  between  contiguous <word>s.
A domain ref must be THE official name of a registry, network, or  host.
It  is  a  symbolic  reference, within a name sub  domain.
At times, it is necessary to bypass standard  mechan  isms  for  resolving  such  references,  using  more primitive information, such as a network host address
rather  than  its associated host name.
To permit such references, this standard provides the  domain  literal  construct.
Its contents must conform with the needs of the sub domain in which it is interpreted.
Domain literals which refer to domains within the ARPA
net  specify  32 bit  Internet addresses, in four 8 bit fields noted in decimal, as described in Request for  Comments
THE USE OF DOMAIN LITERALS IS STRONGLY DISCOURAGED.
permitted  only  as  a means of bypassing temporary system limitations, such as name tables which  are  not complete.
The names of "top level" domains, and  the  names  of  domains under  in  the  ARPA Internet, are registered with the Network Information Center, SRI International, Menlo Park, California.
The local part of an  addr spec  in  a  mailbox  specification (i.e.,  the  host's  name for the mailbox) is understood to be Standard for ARPA
Internet Text Messages whatever the receiving mail protocol server allows.
For exam  ple,  some systems do not understand mailbox references of the form "P. D. Q. Bach", but others do.
Hence,  their  presence  in  local parts which are not quoted  strings, is detected.
However,  such  occurrences  carry  NO semantics.
That is, if a local part has periods within it, an address parser will divide the local part into several tokens, but  the  sequence  of  tokens will be treated as one uninter  preted unit.
will  be  re assembled,  when  the address is passed outside of the system such as to a mail pro  tocol service.
Org is legal and does not require the local part to be  surrounded with  quotation marks.
(However,  "First  Last" DOES require quoting.)
The local part of the address, when passed  outside of  the  mail  system,  within  the  Registry.
Last", again without quotation marks.
BALANCING LOCAL PART AND DOMAIN
In some cases, the boundary between local part and domain  can be  flexible.
The local part may be a simple string, which is used for the final determination of the  recipient's  mailbox.
All  other  levels  of  reference  are, therefore, part of the domain.
For some systems, in the case of abbreviated reference to
the local  and  subordinate  sub domains,  it
may  be possible to specify only one reference within the domain  part  and  place
the  other,  subordinate  name domain  references  within  the local part.
This would appear as: mailbox.sub1.sub2@this domain
Such a specification would be acceptable  to  address  parsers which  conform  to  RFC  #733,  but  do not support this newer Internet standard.
While contrary to the intent of this stan  dard, the form is legal.
Also, some sub domains have a specification syntax which  does not conform to this standard.
For example: sub net.mailbox@sub domain.domain Standard for
ARPA Internet Text Messages uses a different parsing  sequence  for  local part  than  for domain.
the  domain  specification  should  contain fields
which  are  encoded  according to the syntax of this standard and which contain  generally standardized information.
The local part specification should con  tain only that portion of the  address
which  deviates from the form or intention of the domain field.
An individual may have several mailboxes and wish  to  receive mail  at  whatever  mailbox  is  convenient  for the sender to access.
This standard does not provide a means of  specifying "any member of" a list of mailboxes.
A set of individuals may wish to receive mail as a single unit (i.e.,  a  distribution  list).
The <group> construct permits specification of such a list.
A copy of the transmitted message is to be  sent  to  each  mailbox  listed.
This  standard  does  not  permit
recursive  specification of groups within groups.
While a list must be named, it is not required that  the  con  tents  of  the  list be included.
In this case, the <address> serves only as an indication of group distribution  and  would appear in the form:
may  provide  a  group list  distribution facility,  accepting  a single mailbox reference, expanding it to the full distribution list, and relaying the  mail  to  the list's  members.
This standard provides no additional syntax for indicating such a  service.
Using  the  <group>  address alternative,  while listing one mailbox in it, can mean either that the mailbox reference will be expanded to a list or  that there is a group with one member.
At times, a  message  originator  may  wish  to
that  a  message  should  follow.
This is called source routing.
The normal addressing scheme, used  in an  addr spec,  is  carefully separated from such information; the <route> portion of a route addr is provided for such occa  sions.
It specifies the sequence of hosts and/or transmission Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages services that are  to  be  traversed.
Both  domain refs  and domain literals may be used.
The use of source routing is discouraged.
Unless  the sender has special need of path restriction, the choice of transmission route should be left to the mail  tran  sport service.
It often is necessary to send mail to a site, without  know
any  of its valid addresses.
For example, there may be mail system dysfunctions, or a user may wish to find  out  a  person's correct address, at that site.
This standard specifies a single, reserved  mailbox  address (local part)  which  is  to
be valid at each site.
Mail sent to that address is to be routed to  a  person  responsible  for  the site's mail system or to a person with responsibility for general site operation.
The name of the reserved local part address is:
Postmaster so that "Postmaster@domain" is required to be valid.
must be  matched  without  sensi  tivity to alphabetic case, so that "POSTMASTER", "postmas  ter", and even "poStmASteR" is to be accepted.
"USA Standard Code  for  Information  Interchange,"  X3.4.
American  National Standards Institute: New York (1968).
Also in:  Feinler, E.  and J. Postel, eds., "ARPANET Protocol Hand  book", NIC 7104.
"Representations of Universal Time, Local  Time  Differen  tials,  and United States Time Zone References for Information Interchange," X3.51 1975.
Bemer, R.W., "Time and the Computer."
Bennett, C.J.  "JNT Mail Protocol".
Joint Network Team,  Ruther  ford and Appleton Laboratory:  Didcot, England.
Bhushan, A.K., Pogran, K.T., Tomlinson,  R.S.,  and  White,  J.E.
No. 561, Network Information Center
18516;  SRI International:  Menlo Park (September 1973).
Birrell, A.D., Levin, R.,  Needham,  R.M.,  and  Schroeder,  M.D.
"Grapevine:  An Exercise in Distributed Computing," Communica  tions of the ACM 25, 4 (April 1982), 260 274.
Crocker,  D.H.,  Vittal,  J.J.,  Pogran,  K.T.,  Henderson,  D.A.
Text Message," ARPANET Request for  Comments
SRI International:  Menlo Park (November 1977).
Feinler, E.J. and Postel, J.B.
SRI International:  Menlo Park (April 1976).
Also  as  Xerox  Palo  Alto  Research  Center Technical Report CSL 79 4.
Myer, T.H. and Henderson, D.A.  "Message Transmission  Protocol," ARPANET  Request  for  Comments,
No. 680, Network Information Center No. 32116.
SRI International:  Menlo Park (1975).
"Specification of Message Format for Computer Based Message Systems, Recommended Federal Information Processing Standard."
Network Information Center,   SRI International,  Menlo  Park,
Oppen, D.C. and Dalal, Y.K.
"The Clearinghouse:  A Decentralized Agent  for  Locating  Named  Objects in a Distributed Environ  ment," OPD T8103.
Xerox Office Products Division:  Palo Alto, CA.
Postel, J.B.  "Assigned Numbers,"  ARPANET Request for  Comments, No.
SRI International:  Menlo Park (August 1982).
Postel, J.B.  "Simple Mail Transfer  Protocol,"  ARPANET  Request for Comments, No.
SRI International:  Menlo Park (August 1982).
Shoch, J.F.  "Internetwork naming, addressing  and  routing,"  in Proc.
17th IEEE Computer Society International Conference, pp.
72 79, Sept. 1978, IEEE Cat.
8C. Su, Z. and Postel, J.  "The Domain Naming Convention for Internet User  Applications,"  ARPANET
SRI International:  Menlo Park (August 1982).
Internet Text Messages APPENDIX A.  EXAMPLES A.1.
These two "Alfred Neuman" examples have identical  seman  tics, as far as the operation of the local host's mail sending (distribution) program (also sometimes  called  its  "mailer") and  the remote host's mail protocol server are concerned.
In the first example, the  "Alfred  Neuman"  is  ignored  by  the mailer,  as "Neuman@BBN TENEXA" completely specifies the reci  pient.
tion,  and,  again,  "Neuman@BBN TENEXA" is the intended reci  pient.
Note:  When the message crosses name domain  boundaries,  then these specifications must be changed, so as to indicate the remainder of the hierarchy, starting with  the  top level.
This form might be used to indicate that a single mailbox is  shared  by several users.
The quoted string is ignored by the originating host's mailer, because  "Shared@Group.
Arpanet" completely specifies the destination mailbox.
The "(the  Stilt)" is a comment, which is NOT included in the  destination  mailbox  address  handed  to the originating system's mailer.
The local part of the address is the  string "
Chamberlain", with NO space between the first and second words.
Address Lists Gourmets:  Pompous Person <WhoZiWhatZit@Cordon Bleu>,
Under (Australian National Television), Cheapie@Discount Liquors;, Cruisers:  Port@Portugal, Jones@SEA;, Another@Somewhere.
This group list example points out the use of comments and the mixing of addresses and groups.
Author sent George Jones logs into his host  as  "Jones".
Org or From:  George Jones <Jones@Group.
Secretary sent George Jones logs in as Jones on his  host.
His  secre  tary,  who logs in as Secy sends mail for him.
Replies to the mail should go to George.
<Jones@Group> Sender:  Secy@Other Group A.2.3.
Secretary sent, for user of shared directory George Jones' secretary sends mail  for  George.
Replies should go to George.
Committee activity, with one author George is a member of a committee.
He wishes to have any replies to his message go to all committee members.
if  George  had  not  included  himself   in   the Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages enumeration  of  The  Committee,  he
would not have gotten an implicit reply; the presence of the  "Reply to"  field  SUPER  SEDES the sending of a reply to the person named in the "From" field.
Secretary acting as full agent of author George Jones asks his secretary  (Secy@Host)  to  send  a message for him in his capacity as Group.
He wants his secre  tary to handle all replies.
Agent for user without online mailbox
A friend  of  George's,  Sarah,  is  visiting.
George's secretary  sends  some  mail to a friend of Sarah in computer  land.
Replies should go to George, whose mailbox is Jones  at Registry.
Agent for member of a committee George's secretary sends out a message which was authored jointly by all the members of a committee.
Note that the name of the committee cannot be specified, since <group>
names  are not permitted in the From field.
Secy@SHost Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages A.3.
Org Note that the "Bcc" field may be empty, while the  "To"  field is required to have at least one address.
About as complex as you're going to get Date
Root>, "Sam Irving"@Other Host;, Standard Distribution: /main/davis/people/standard@Other Host, "
He asked me to handle his mail for him.
He'll be able to provide  a more  accurate  explanation
when  he  returns next week.
In Reply To: <some.string@DBM.Group>, George's message
This is a sample of user defined field  names.
There could also be a field name "Special action", but its name might later be preempted Message ID:
Some mail reading software systems may wish to perform  only minimal  processing,  ignoring  the internal syntax of structured field bodies and treating them the  same  as  unstructured field  bodies.
Such software will need only to distinguish:
Header fields from the message body,   Beginnings of fields from lines which continue fields,   Field names from field contents.
The abbreviated set of syntactic rules  which  follows  will suffice  for  this  purpose.
It describes a limited view of mes  sages and is a subset of the syntactic rules provided in the main part of this specification.
One small exception is that the con  tents of field bodies consist only of text: B.1.
[field body] CRLF field name
SEMANTICS Headers occur before the message body and are terminated  by a null line (i.e., two contiguous CRLFs).
A line which continues a header field begins with a SPACE or HTAB  character,  while  a  line  beginning a field starts with a printable character which is not a colon.
A field name consists of one or  more  printable  characters (excluding  colon,  space, and control characters).
A field name MUST be contained on one line.
Upper and lower case are not dis  tinguished when comparing field names.
Internet Text Messages C.  DIFFERENCES FROM RFC #733
The following summarizes the differences between this  stan
dard  and the one specified in Arpanet Request for Comments #733, "Standard for the Format of ARPA  Network
The differences  are  listed  in the order of their occurrence in the current specification.
These now must be a sequence of  printable  characters.
They may not contain any LWSP chars.
For presentation purposes, and when passing a specification to  a  system  that does  not conform to this standard, periods are to be contigu  ous with their surrounding lexical tokens.
The presence of one LWSP  char between other tokens is still directed.
ATOM Atoms may not contain SPACE.
The lexical tokens  <domain literal>  and  <
The "Return path:" and "Received:" fields have been specified.
FROM The "From" field must contain machine usable addresses
Multiple  addresses may be specified, but named lists (groups) may not.
The meta construct of prefacing field names  with  the  string "Resent "  has been added, to indicate that a message has been forwarded by an intermediate recipient.
A message must contain at least one destination address field. "
To" and "CC" are required to contain at least one address.
IN REPLY TO The field body is no longer a comma separated list, although a sequence is still permitted.
The field body is no longer a comma separated list, although a sequence is still permitted.
A field has been specified that permits  senders  to  indicate that the body of a message has been encrypted.
EXTENSION FIELD Extension fields are prohibited from beginning with the  char  acters "X ".
DATE AND TIME SPECIFICATION C.4.1.
Fewer optional forms are permitted  and  the  list  of  three  letter time zones has been shortened.
ADDRESS SPECIFICATION Standard for ARPA Internet Text Messages C.5.1.
now  is  either a single mailbox reference or is a named list of addresses.
The  latter  indi  cates a group distribution.
GROUPS Group lists are now required to to have a name.
Group  lists may not be nested.
may  indicate  a  person's  name,  as before.
no longer may specify multiple mailboxes and may not be nested.
ROUTE ADDRESSING Addresses now are taken to be absolute, global specifications, independent  of transmission paths.
The <route> construct has been provided, to permit explicit specification  of  transmis  sion  path.
The current standard separates these specifications and only one at sign is permitted.
The string " at " no longer is used as an  address  delimiter.
DOMAINS Hierarchical, logical name domains have been added.
The local part "Postmaster" has been reserved, so that users  can be guaranteed at least one valid address at a site.
LISTING OF SYNTAX RULES address
; (141 172, 97. 122.)
Any field which is defined in a document published as a formal extension to this specification; none will have names beginning with the string "X "> Standard for ARPA
<the ASCII characters making up the field body, as defined in the following sections, and consisting of combinations of atom, quoted string, and specials tokens, or else consisting of texts> field name
uninterpreted ; case preserved LWSP char
<Any field which has not been defined in this specification or published as an extension to this specification; names for such fields must be unique and may be pre empted by published extensions
