Abstract This document describes the standardization collaboration between the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
This document contains a set of principles and guidelines that serves as the basis for establishing a cooperation framework between the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
This cooperation is intended to secure timely development of technical specifications that facilitate maximum interoperability with existing (fixed and mobile) Internet systems, devices, and protocols.
Within the OMA, specific activities are undertaken through OMA working groups, each with an area of responsibility.
These activities are authorized, and their output is approved by, the OMA Technical Plenary.
The list of OMA working groups, OMA Specifications for public comment, the OMA work program, and publicly available working group drafts can be found at the OMA web site, <http://www.openmobilealliance.org
Within the IETF, activities are undertaken within a framework of Areas, with specific activities being undertaken by working groups that are chartered within each Area.
Working group output is reviewed by the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) and published by the RFC Editor.
IETF activities are based on a principle of open contribution and participation by any interested party.
Information on IETF working groups, current work item drafts, meeting schedules, and mailing lists are published on the IETF web site, <http://www.ietf.org>.
The IETF and the OMA, are cooperating with a mutual desire to support the integrity of specifications and standards developed by each body.
The preferred approach is that the OMA uses the Internet standards unchanged, if feasible, and communicates requirements for change to the IETF, as needed.
The parties intend to work together in an effort to avoid duplication of work.
Each organization will operate according to its own rules and procedures, including rules governing Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), specification elaboration, approval, and maintenance.
This cooperation framework is intended to guide collaborative efforts, and should be put into use in as much as it is applicable to these efforts.
If either party finds this framework inapplicable, then it may notify the other party so that this framework may be modified or withdrawn, as appropriate.
In the further development of OMA specifications, the benefit of adopting Internet specifications has been identified.
Although this document recognizes the importance of interoperability of OMA specifications with the existing Internet and hence the use of IETF standards, the OMA recognizes that additions or modifications might be needed in order to make the IETF Internet specifications meet the needs of the OMA.
In such cases, the OMA will take its concerns directly to the appropriate IETF working groups for resolution.
When no appropriate working group can be found or it is not known where to direct the communication, or in the case of resolution of consequent matters, the issue will be raised through the OMA's designated liaison to the IETF.
The IETF may also need to ask questions of the OMA in order to refine its understanding of OMA requirements or may wish to offer guidance to OMA on the effective use of Internet specifications.
Where possible, these communications will occur in the context of a discussion between OMA and an IETF working group.
In the event that a working group level discussion is deemed inappropriate for the desired communication, the matter will be raised through the IETF's designated liaison to the OMA.
Document Sharing Both the OMA and the IETF encourage the sharing of draft documents that are of mutual interest.
All IETF documents are publicly available from the IETF web site, and discussion of documents is hosted on open mailing lists.
OMA documents intended for public consumption, including working drafts, are published for open access on the OMA web site, <http://www.openmobilealliance.org/
Technical contributions to OMA by its members are also encouraged to make publicly available.
The OMA and the IETF will work to update and exchange, on a regular basis, a list of dependencies between each organization's specifications and work in progress.
Participation in the IETF Process Participation in the IETF process is completely open.
This allows OMA delegates to participate to whatever extent the OMA considers appropriate in IETF meetings and mailing list discussions to assist the IETF in refining its understanding of OMA requirements and in meeting requirements that the IETF deems appropriate.
This close working relationship also offers an excellent opportunity for OMA delegates to receive informal guidance from IETF on OMA's use of Internet specifications.
The vast majority of technical discussions and decision making within the IETF is undertaken by using open mailing lists.
It is recommended that interested individuals subscribe to and participate on these lists.
The OMA is to be notified of new work to be undertaken by the IETF via a nominated IETF liaison notification mechanism.
When the informal working group level of interaction is insufficient, matters can be raised through a liaison channel.
The OMA and the IETF shall each establish liaison functions for communication with the other organization and shall appoint one or more individuals to those functions.
The preferred way for organizations to work with IETF is through the working groups.
However, IETF has a limited number of individual liaison roles with other organizations when conditions warrant the appointment of a specific person.
The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) shall appoint a specific person to serve as the OMA Liaison.
The role of the IETF's OMA Liaison is to act as an initial contact point in IETF for administrative aspects of this collaboration that cannot easily be handled in other ways (e.g., at a technical level by interactions with IETF Working Groups or Area Directors).
It is agreed that the role does not carry the expectation of attendance at OMA meetings or participation in OMA administrative processes, and it is anticipated that all liaison efforts assigned to this individual will be carried out by electronic mail.
It is understood that the liaison does not have the ability to make exceptions to, or special provisions for, IETF policies and procedures.
It is expected that the individual appointed to this role would:  be informed by the OMA of OMA activities on behalf of the IETF, including new work proposals, and be able to report those using appropriate channels within the IETF,  convey liaisons statements from the OMA to the IETF, and be responsible for shepherding the OMA communication to the relevant parts of the IETF,  report to the OMA on progress with IETF consideration of OMA liaison statements, and  have direct access to the OMA technical leadership as well as direct access to the IAB and IETF Area Directors, as required.
OMA meetings are normally only open to delegates from OMA member organizations.
To assist the information flow between the organizations, the IETF may, by prior written invitation from the OMA on a per case basis, send a representative to participate in and represent the IETF at an OMA Technical Plenary and working group meeting under conditions set forth by the OMA.
The representative could be the IETF liaison or, in the event that the liaison cannot attend, some other designated individual.
OMA Liaison to IETF The OMA Technical Plenary shall establish an IETF liaison to be the initial contact point in the OMA for matters pertaining to the OMA  IETF cooperation.
The OMA IETF liaison function, therefore, is expected to work with the concerned IETF and OMA working groups and to support the interaction between the OMA and the IETF.
Whenever possible, and as the preferred primary method of communication and coordination of activity, communication at the working group level is strongly encouraged.
When deemed necessary, formal communication between OMA and IETF is also permitted.
These communications are to be recorded in the form of Liaison Statements, and the IETF will use the OMA liaison role to convey these statements between the IETF and the OMA.
All liaison statements made by the IETF or directed to the IETF shall be published by the IETF as public documents.
All liaison statements made by the IETF will comply with the IETF IPR policy as documented in RFC 3667 [1] and RFC 3668 [2].
Contributions OMA members may make contributions to the IETF in their capacity as IETF participants, under the IETF's IPR policy, as documented in RFC 3667 [1] and RFC3668 [2].
IETF participants who are also members of the OMA may make contributions to the OMA only in their capacity as OMA members, under the OMA's membership rules, including its IPR policy.
OMA mailing lists are not open to the general public.
It is recommended that work of mutual interest be discussed on the relevant IETF mailing lists.
The OMA may make normative references to the IETF Proposed Standard, Draft Standard, Standard, Best Common Practice and Informational specifications that are published as part of the "Request for Comments" (RFC) document series.
The IETF and the OMA will not co develop any documents or material.
Neither the IETF or the OMA makes any representations with respect to and does not warrant the accuracy of any information or any document.
Without limiting the foregoing, each party agrees to accept the terms of and reproduce any warranty disclaimers or limitations of liability that are included in any reproduction of published material made available to it under this cooperation framework.
Neither the OMA or the IETF acquires any intellectual or industrial property rights under this cooperation framework or through any disclosure.
No license to any patent, trademark, copyright, or other proprietary right is granted here.
There is no obligation for either the OMA or the IETF to incorporate the materials presented by the other party.
This cooperation framework and the relationship between the IETF and the OMA does not constitute a partnership, joint venture, agency, or contract of employment between the IETF and the OMA.
The areas of common interest between the IETF and the OMA include the following:  Instant Messaging based on SIP/SIMPLE  Presence and availability  Privacy  SIP Event Notification  Location services, such as geographic location
Device management  Multimedia messaging, including email interconnectivity and mapping  Group management  Telephone number mapping (ENUM)
