Abstract This document specifies the 'disclosure' link relation type.
It designates a list of IPR disclosures made with respect to the material for which such a relation type is specified.
[RFC5988] defined a way of indicating relationships between resources on the Web.
This document specifies the 'disclosure' link relation type.
It designates a list of IPR disclosures made with respect to the material for which such a relation type is specified.
Please note that the term "patent disclosure" should be considered synonymous with "IPR disclosure" for the purposes of 'disclosure' link relation type semantics, as patent disclosures are a subset of IPR disclosures.
The W3C already mandates the use of the 'disclosure' link relation type for links to patent disclosures in all its documents.
However, it has long been used with no proper specification and registration.
This document is to fill this gap and encourage wider use of the 'disclosure' relation type.
It formally specifies the existing practice of use of the link relation type and registers it in the registry created by RFC 5988.
Please note that the 'disclosure' relation type designates a different resource than the 'copyright' type does; the latter refers to the copyright statement while the former is used to reference a list of patent disclosures.
[RFC5988] for more information on the 'copyright' relation type.
Whenever the 'disclosure' relation type is used, the resource at the target Internationalized Resource Identifier (IRI)
[RFC5988] MUST represent a list of patent disclosures made with respect to the material referenced by context IRI.
This also covers the case of an empty list and a list containing one entry.
This section provides an example of possible use of the 'disclosure' relation type.
If the page <http://example.org/ipr/meta spec/
> contains a list of patent disclosures made with respect to the specification found at <http://example.org/specs/meta spec/spec.html>, the latter would have the following fragment of HTML source code: <html
> for the list of patent disclosures made with respect to this specification.
In the case of Link header field, the HTTP response would contain the following header field:
spec/>; rel "disclosure"; title "Patent Disclosures List"
(Please note that the actual header field will not contain the line break and spaces after the 'rel' parameter.)
The 'disclosure' relation type is truly believed not to raise any new security issues that are not discussed in RFC 5988 for generic use of the Web linking mechanism.
IANA Considerations IANA has registered the 'disclosure' link relation type in the "Link Relations" registry, with a reference to this document, using the following template:  Relation name: disclosure  Description: Refers to a list of patent disclosures made with respect to material for which 'disclosure' relation is specified.
