Abstract This document proposes the addition of new cipher suites to the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol to support the SEED encryption algorithm as a bulk cipher algorithm.
This document proposes the addition of new cipher suites to the TLS protocol [TLS] to support the SEED encryption algorithm as a bulk cipher algorithm.
SEED SEED is a symmetric encryption algorithm that was developed by Korea Information Security Agency (KISA) and a group of experts, beginning in 1998.
The input/output block size of SEED is 128 bit and the key length is also 128 bit.
SEED has the 16 round Feistel structure.
A 128 bit input is divided into two 64 bit blocks and the right 64 bit block is an input to the round function with a 64 bit subkey generated from the key scheduling.
SEED is easily implemented in various software and hardware because it is designed to increase the efficiency of memory storage and the simplicity of generating keys without degrading the security of the algorithm.
In particular, it can be effectively adopted in a computing environment that has a restricted resources such as mobile devices, smart cards, and so on.
SEED is a national industrial association standard [TTASSEED] and is widely used in South Korea for electronic commerce and financial services operated on wired & wireless PKI.
The algorithm specification and object identifiers are described in [SEED ALG].
The SEED homepage, http://www.kisa.or.kr/seed/seed eng.html, contains a wealth of information about SEED, including detailed specification, evaluation report, test vectors, and so on.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document (in uppercase, as shown) are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
The new cipher suites proposed here have the following definitions: CipherSuite TLS RSA WITH
; CipherSuite TLS DHE DSS WITH SEED
All the cipher suites described here use SEED in cipher block chaining (CBC) mode as a bulk cipher algorithm.
SEED is a 128 bit block cipher with 128 bit key size.
All the cipher suites described here use SHA 1
[SHA 1] in an HMAC construction as described in section 5 of [TLS].
The cipher suites defined here differ in the type of certificate and key exchange method.
For the meanings of the terms RSA, DH DSS, DH RSA, DHE DSS, DHE RSA, and DH anon, please refer to sections 7.4.2 and 7.4.3 of [TLS].
It is not believed that the new cipher suites are less secure than the corresponding older ones.
No security problem has been found on SEED.
SEED is robust against known attacks, including differential cryptanalysis, linear cryptanalysis, and related key attacks, etc.
SEED has gone through wide public scrutinizing procedures.
Especially, it has been evaluated and also considered cryptographically secure by trustworthy organizations such as ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 27 and Japan CRYPTREC (Cryptography Research and Evaluation Committees)
SEED has been submitted to several other standardization bodies such as ISO (ISO/IEC 18033 3) and IETF S/MIME Mail Security [SEED SMIME]; and it is under consideration.
For further security considerations, the reader is encouraged to read [SEED EVAL].
For other security considerations, please refer to the security of the corresponding older cipher suites described in [TLS] and [AES TLS].
