Abstract This document defines a YANG data model for the configuration and identification of some common system properties within a device containing a Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF) server.
This document also includes data node definitions for system identification, time of day management, user management, DNS resolver configuration, and some protocol operations for system management.
This document defines a YANG [RFC6020] data model for the configuration and identification of some common properties within a device containing a Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF) server.
Devices that are managed by NETCONF and perhaps other mechanisms have common properties that need to be configured and monitored in a standard way.
The "ietf system" YANG module defined in this document provides the following features:  configuration and monitoring of system identification  configuration and monitoring of system time of day  configuration of user authentication
configuration of the DNS resolver  system control operations (shutdown, restart, setting time) 1.1.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, [RFC2119].
The following terms are defined in [RFC6241] and are not redefined here:  client  configuration data  server  state data
The following terms are defined in [RFC6020] and are not redefined here:  augment  data model 1.2.
Tree Diagrams A simplified graphical representation of the data model is used in this document.
Abbreviations before data node names: "rw" means configuration (read write), and "ro" means state data (read only).
There are many common properties used to identify devices, operating systems, software versions, etc.
that need to be supported in the system data module.
These objects are defined as operational state data, and the information returned by the server is intended to be specific to the device vendor.
Some user configurable administrative strings are also provided, such as the system location and description.
System Time Management Management of the date and time used by the system needs to be supported.
The use of one or more NTP servers to automatically set the system date and time needs to be possible.
Utilization of the Time Zone Database [RFC6557] also needs to be supported.
It should be possible to configure the system to use NTP. 2.3.
The authentication mechanism needs to support password authentication over RADIUS in order to support deployment scenarios with centralized authentication servers.
Additionally, for scenarios when no centralized authentication server exists or for situations where the centralized authentication server cannot be reached from the device, local users need to be supported.
Since the mandatory transport protocol for NETCONF is Secure Shell (SSH) [RFC6242], the authentication model needs to support SSH's "publickey" and "password" authentication methods [RFC4252].
The model for authentication configuration should be flexible enough to support authentication methods defined by other standards documents or by vendors.
It should be possible to configure the system authentication properties.
The configuration of the DNS resolver within the system containing the NETCONF server is required in order to control how domain names are resolved.
A few operations are needed to support common tasks such as restarting the device or setting the system date and time.
date and time New "case" statements can be added in future revisions of this data model, or through augmentation by some other data model.
The data model for configuration of the DNS resolver has the following structure:  rw system
New "case" statements can be added in future revisions of this data model, or through augmentation by some other data model.
The data model for configuration of the RADIUS client has the following structure:  rw system
New "case" statements can be added in future revisions of this data model, or through augmentation by some other data model.
This document defines three authentication methods for use with NETCONF:  publickey for local users over SSH  password for local users over any secure transport  password for RADIUS users over any secure transport Additional methods can be defined by other standards documents or by vendors.
This document defines two optional YANG features: "local users" and "radius authentication", which the server advertises to indicate support for configuring local users on the device and support for using RADIUS for authentication, respectively.
The authentication parameters defined in this document are primarily used to configure authentication of NETCONF users but MAY also be used by other interfaces, e.g., a command line interface or a web  based user interface.
The data model for user authentication has the following structure:  rw system
If the NETCONF server advertises the "local users" feature, configuration of local users and their SSH public keys is supported in the /system/authentication/user list.
Public key authentication is requested by the SSH client.
If the "local users" feature is supported, then when a NETCONF client starts an SSH session towards the server using the "publickey" authentication "method name" [RFC4252], the SSH server looks up the user name given in the SSH authentication request in the /system/authentication/user list and verifies the key as described in [RFC4253].
If the NETCONF server advertises the "local users" feature, configuration of local users and their passwords is supported in the /system/authentication/user list.
For NETCONF transport protocols that support password authentication, the leaf list "user authentication order" is used to control whether or not local user password authentication should be used.
In SSH, password authentication is requested by the client.
Other NETCONF transport protocols MAY also support password authentication.
When local user password authentication is requested, the NETCONF transport looks up the user name provided by the client in the /system/authentication/user list and verifies the password.
If the NETCONF server advertises the "radius authentication" feature, the device supports user authentication using RADIUS.
For NETCONF transport protocols that support password authentication, the leaf list "user authentication order" is used to control whether or not RADIUS password authentication should be used.
In SSH, password authentication is requested by the client.
Other NETCONF transport protocols MAY also support password authentication.
The following operations are defined: set current datetime system restart system shutdown Two protocol operations are included to restart or shut down the system.
The 'system restart' operation can be used to restart the entire system (not just the NETCONF server).
The 'system shutdown' operation can be used to power off the entire system.
Relationship to the SNMPv2 MIB
If a device implements the SNMPv2 MIB [RFC3418], there are two objects that MAY be mapped by the implementation.
See the YANG module definition in Section 6 for details.
The following table lists the YANG data nodes with corresponding objects in the SNMPv2 MIB.
IANA Crypt Hash YANG Module
This YANG module references [RFC1321], [IEEE 1003.1 2008], and [FIPS.180 4.2012].
module iana crypt hash { namespace "urn:ietf:params:xml:
This YANG module defines a type for storing passwords using a hash function and features to indicate which hash functions are supported by an implementation.
The latest revision of this YANG module can be obtained from the IANA web site.
Requests for new values should be made to IANA via email (iana@iana.org).
Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of the code.
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license info).
The initial version of this YANG module is part of RFC 7317; see the RFC itself for full legal notices."
The algorithms for applying the hash function and encoding the result are implemented in various UNIX systems as the function crypt(3).
A value of this type matches one of the forms: $0$<clear text password> $<id>$<salt>$<password hash
The '$0$' prefix signals that the value is clear text.
When such a value is received by the server, a hash value is calculated, and the string '$<id>$<salt>$' or $<id>$<parameter>$<salt>$ is prepended to the result.
This value is stored in the configuration data store.
it 'as is' in the data store.
When a server needs to verify a password given by a user, it finds the stored password hash string for that user, extracts the salt, and calculates the hash with the salt and given password as input.
If the calculated hash value is the same as the stored value, the password given by the client is accepted.
This type defines the following hash functions: id   hash function
The server indicates support for the different hash functions by advertising the corresponding feature."; reference "IEEE Std
The MD5 Message Digest Algorithm FIPS.180 4.2012:
; } feature crypt hash md5 { description
"Indicates that the device supports the MD5 hash function in 'crypt hash' values."
This YANG module imports YANG extensions from [RFC6536] and
imports YANG types from [RFC6991].
It also references [RFC1035], [RFC2865], [RFC3418], [RFC5607], [RFC5966], and [RFC6557].
<CODE BEGINS> file "ietf system@2014 08 06.yang
" module ietf system { namespace "urn:
yang:ietf system"; prefix "sys"; import ietf yang types { prefix yang; } import ietf inet types { prefix inet; } import ietf netconf acm { prefix nacm; } import iana crypt hash { prefix ianach; } organization "IETF NETMOD (NETCONF Data Modeling Language) Working Group"; contact
>"; description "This module contains a collection of YANG definitions for the configuration and identification of some common system properties within a device containing a NETCONF server.
This includes data node definitions for system identification, time of day management, user management, DNS resolver configuration, and some protocol operations for system management.
Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of the code.
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license info).
This version of this YANG module is part of RFC 7317; see the RFC itself for full legal notices."
The exact set of valid values is an implementation specific matter.
Client discovery of the exact set of time zone names for a particular server is out of scope."
; reference "RFC 2865: Remote Authentication Dial
; } feature local users { if feature authentication; description "Indicates that the device supports configuration of local user authentication."
; } feature radius authentication { if feature radius; if feature authentication; description "Indicates that the device supports configuration of user authentication over RADIUS."
; reference "RFC 2865: Remote Authentication Dial
"Indicates that the device can be configured to use one or more NTP servers to set the system date and time."
; } feature ntp udp port { if feature ntp; description "Indicates that the device supports the configuration of the UDP port for NTP servers.
"Indicates that the device supports the configuration of the UDP and TCP port for DNS servers.
; reference "RFC 2865: Remote Authentication Dial
; } identity radius authentication type { description "Base identity for RADIUS authentication types."
; } identity radius pap { base radius authentication type; description
"The device requests Password Authentication Protocol (PAP) authentication from the RADIUS server."
; reference "RFC 2865: Remote Authentication Dial
"The device requests Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol (CHAP) authentication from the RADIUS server."
; reference "RFC 2865: Remote Authentication Dial
/ container system { description "System group configuration."; leaf contact { type string; description "The administrator contact information for the system.
A server implementation MAY map this leaf to the sysContact MIB object.
Such an implementation needs to use some mechanism to handle the differences in size and characters allowed between this leaf and sysContact.
The definition of such a mechanism is outside the scope of this document."
This name can be a single domain label or the fully qualified domain name of the host."
; } leaf location { type string; description "The system location.
A server implementation MAY map this leaf to the sysLocation MIB object.
Such an implementation needs to use some mechanism to handle the differences in size and characters allowed between this leaf and sysLocation.
The definition of such a mechanism is outside the scope of this document."
The number of minutes to add to UTC time to identify the time zone for this system.
For example, 'UTC 8:00 hours' would be represented as ' 480'.
Note that automatic daylight saving time adjustment is not provided if this object is used.";
; } list server { key name; description "List of NTP servers to use for system clock synchronization.
This device will not provide synchronization to the configured NTP server."
; } enum peer { description "Use symmetric active association mode.
This device will not provide synchronization to the servers."
; } leaf prefer { type boolean; default false; description "Indicates whether this server should be preferred or not."
When the resolver is invoked by a calling application, it sends the query to the first name server in this list.
If no response has been received within 'timeout' seconds, the resolver continues with the next server in the list.
If no response is received from any server, the resolver continues with the first server again.
When the resolver has traversed the list 'attempts' times without receiving any response, it gives up and returns an error to the calling application.
Implementations MAY limit the number of entries in this list."
UDP  and TCP specific configuration parameters for DNS."
; reference "RFC 1035: Domain Names Implementation and Specification RFC 5966
The number of times the resolver will send a query to all of its name servers before giving up and returning an error to the calling application."
When the RADIUS client is invoked by a calling application, it sends the query to the first server in this list.
If no response has been received within 'timeout' seconds, the client continues with the next server in the list.
If no response is received from any server, the client continues with the first server again.
If authentication with one method fails, the next method is used.
If no method succeeds, the user is denied access.
An empty user authentication order leaf list still allows authentication of users using mechanisms that do not involve a password.
If the 'radius authentication' feature is advertised by the NETCONF server, the 'radius' identity can be added to this list.
If the 'local users' feature is advertised by the NETCONF server, the 'local users' identity can be added to this list."
Valid values are the values in the IANA 'Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Parameters' registry, Public Key Algorithm Names."
; reference "IANA 'Secure Shell (SSH)
; description "The binary public key data for this SSH key, as specified by RFC 4253, Section 6.6, i.e.: string    certificate or public key format identifier byte[n]
/ container system state { config false; description "System group operational state."; container platform { description "Contains vendor specific information for identifying the system platform and operating system."; reference "IEEE Std
; description "The current release level of the operating system in use.
This string MAY indicate the OS source code revision."
This string MAY indicate the specific OS build date and target variant information."; reference "IEEE Std 1003.1 2008
default deny all; description "Set the /system state/clock/current datetime leaf to the specified value.
If the system is using NTP
default deny all; description "Request that the entire system be restarted immediately.
IANA Considerations IANA has created an IANA maintained YANG module called "iana crypt hash", based on the contents of Section 5, which will allow for new hash algorithms to be added to the type "crypt hash".
The registration procedure will be Expert Review, as defined by [RFC5226].
This document registers two URIs in the "IETF XML Registry" [RFC3688].
Following the format in RFC 3688, the following registrations have been made.
N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
This document registers two YANG modules in the "YANG Module Names" registry [RFC6020].
RFC 7317 name: ietf system namespace: urn:ietf:params:xml:
The YANG modules defined in this memo are designed to be accessed via the NETCONF protocol [RFC6241].
The lowest NETCONF layer is the secure transport layer and the mandatory to implement secure transport
The NETCONF access control model [RFC6536] provides the means to restrict access for particular NETCONF users to a pre configured subset of all available NETCONF protocol operations and content.
There are a number of data nodes defined in the "ietf system" YANG module which are writable/creatable/deletable (i.e., config true, which is the default).
These data nodes may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
Write operations (e.g., edit config) to these data nodes without proper protection can have a negative effect on network operations.
These are the subtrees and data nodes and their sensitivity/vulnerability:  /system/clock/timezone: This choice contains the objects used to control the time zone used by the device.
This container contains the objects used to control the Network Time Protocol servers used by the device.
/dns resolver: This container contains the objects used to control the Domain Name System servers used by the device.
This container contains the objects used to control the Remote Authentication Dial In User Service servers used by the device.
/system/authentication/user authentication order: This leaf controls how user login attempts are authenticated by the device.
This list contains the local users enabled on the system.
Some of the readable data nodes in the "ietf system"
YANG module may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
It is thus important to control read access (e.g., via get, get config or notification) to these data nodes.
These are the subtrees and data nodes and their sensitivity/vulnerability:
/system/platform: This container has objects that may help identify the specific NETCONF server and/or operating system implementation used on the device.
This list has objects that may help identify the specific user names and password information in use on the device.
Some of the RPC operations in the "ietf system" YANG module may be considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.
It is thus important to control access to these operations.
These are the operations and their sensitivity/vulnerability:
Changes the current date and time on the device.
system restart: Reboots the device.
system shutdown: Shuts down the device.
Since this document describes the use of RADIUS for purposes of authentication, it is vulnerable to all of the threats that are present in other RADIUS applications.
For a discussion of such threats, see [RFC2865] and [RFC3162], and Section 4 of [RFC3579].
This document provides configuration parameters for SSH's "publickey" and "password" authentication mechanisms.
Section 9.4 of [RFC4251] and Section 11 of [RFC4252] discuss security considerations for these mechanisms.
The "iana crypt hash" YANG module defines a type "crypt hash" that can be used to store MD5 hashes.
[RFC6151] discusses security considerations for MD5.
The usage of MD5 is NOT RECOMMENDED.
