Abstract This document is registration for the 'example' media type and 'example' subtypes within the standards tree.
The 'example/ ' and ' /example' media types are defined for documentation purposes only.
From time to time, documents created by the IETF or by other standards bodies show examples involving the use of media types, where the actual media type is not relevant.
It would be useful in such cases to be able to show a media type whose illustrative role in the example is clear.
In the worst case, this can be useful to debug implementations where the designer mistook the example for a requirement of the protocol concerned.
To meet this need, this document registers the following media types:  the 'example' media type;  the 'application/example', 'audio/example', 'image/example', 'message/example', 'model/example', 'multipart/example', 'text/example', and 'video/example' media subtypes.
It is suggested that compilers of illustrative examples involving media types in trees other than the standards tree might also incorporate the string "example" into their hypothetical media types.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
Registration of the 'example' Media Type
This section registers the 'example' media type in accordance with the requirements of RFC 4288.
Subtype name: any subtype may be used with the 'example' type.
However, IANA MUST NOT register any subtypes for the 'example' media type.
Required parameters: as invented by the user.
Optional parameters: as invented by the user.
Encoding considerations: as invented by the user.
Security considerations: The 'example' media type is defined for use in documentation only.
It MUST NOT be implemented.
Its appearance in real code could lead to unpredictable results and therefore open up security holes.
Any attempt to negotiate or send the 'example' media type is bound to lead to interoperability problems.
Applications that use this media type: as invented by the user.
Macintosh file type code(s): not applicable.
Person & email address to contact for further information: ietf
Restrictions on usage: This type is intended only for use in documents providing examples involving specification of some media type, where the actual media type used is irrelevant.
Internet Engineering Task Force Change controller:
Internet Engineering Task Force 4.
Registration of the 'application/example', 'audio/example', 'image/example', 'message/example', 'model/example', 'multipart/example', 'text/example', and 'video/example' Subtypes
This section registers 'example' media subtypes in accordance with the requirements of RFC 4288.
Type name: 'application', 'audio', 'image', 'message', 'model', 'multipart', 'text', and 'video'.
Required parameters: those required by the type and any others as invented by the user.
those offered by the type and any others as invented by the user.
Encoding considerations: as invented by the user.
Security considerations: The 'example' media subtypes are defined for use in documentation only.
They MUST NOT be implemented.
Their appearance in real code could lead to unpredictable results and therefore open up security holes.
Any attempt to negotiate or send one of these 'example' media subtypes is bound to lead to interoperability problems.
Applications that use this media type: as invented by the user.
Macintosh file type code(s): not applicable.
Person & email address to contact for further information: ietf
Restrictions on usage: These subtypes are intended only for use in documents providing examples involving specification of some subtype of the given media type, where the actual subtype used is irrelevant.
Internet Engineering Task Force Change controller:
Internet Engineering Task Force 5.
The 'example' media type and subtypes are defined for use in documentation only.
They MUST NOT be implemented.
Any attempt to implement them in real code could lead to unpredictable results and thus potentially open up security holes.
This document specifies and registers the 'example' media type and the 'application/example', 'audio/example', 'image/example', 'message/example', 'model/example', 'multipart/example', 'text/example', and 'video/example' subtypes.
