Abstract Experience has shown that people get confused when discussing the three numeric fields of the TLSA record.
This document specifies descriptive acronyms for the three numeric fields in TLSA records.
This document updates the format of the IANA registry created by RFC 6698.
During discussions on how to add DNS Based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE)
[RFC6698] technology to new protocols and services, people were repeatedly confused as to what the numeric values stood for and even the order of the fields of a TLSA record (note that TLSA is not an acronym but a name).
This document updates the IANA registry definition for the TLSA record to add a column containing an acronym for each specified field, in order to reduce confusion.
This document does not change the DANE protocol in any way.
It is expected that DANE parsers in applications and DNS software can adopt parsing the acronyms for each field.
This document applies to the "DNS Based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE) Parameters" registry located at <http://www.iana.org/ assignments/dane parameters
IANA has added a column with an acronym to each of the sub registries.
[RFC6698] and this document are the referenced documents for the three sub registries.
As these acronyms are offered for human consumption, case does not matter; it is expected that software that parses TLSA records will handle upper , mixed , or lower case characters as input.
The reference for this registry has been updated to include both [RFC6698] and this document.
The reference for this registry has been updated to include both [RFC6698] and this document.
PrivSel   Reserved for Private Use
The reference for this registry has been updated to include both [RFC6698] and this document.
255    PrivMatch   Reserved for Private Use
Examples of Usage Two examples are described below.
TLSA Records Using/Displaying the Acronyms  666.
Acronym Use in a Specification Example Protocol FOO only allows TLSA records using PKIX EE and DANE EE, with selector SPKI, and using SHA2 512.
This document only changes registry fields and does not change the behavior of any protocol.
The hope is to reduce confusion, which would lead to better specification and operations.
