Abstract This document defines the procedures for IANA to administer and maintain the Object Identifier (OID) tree under the Remote Monitoring (rmon) root.
This memo also documents the currently assigned values.
The RMONMIB Working Group so far has maintained its own registry for OID assignments for new MIB modules under the root OID for rmon [RFC2819].
This has worked reasonably well, although errors had to be corrected at a late stage one or two times, and a few now defunct assignments have been made as well.
It is also a somewhat non standard way of doing things, because normally a new standards track MIB module will get a MIB root assigned at the time that the module is being published as part of an RFC.
This document lists the currently assigned rmon OIDs.
It also describes the procedures and rules for new assignments and asks IANA to take over the responsibility for existing and future assignments.
The current assignments are not all too logical.
Initially normal MIB OIDs were assigned under rmon, but at a later time the WG used the rmon root OID to create new MIB modules underneath it.
Some people will claim 'an OID is just an OID', and while this is true, it does not make things easier if the organisation of OIDs is not logical.
However, we cannot change what has been assigned in the past.
From now on, only MODULE IDENTITY macro (MIB root) assignments will be made (by IANA) under the 'rmon' node.
Within a MIB module, the working group authors/editors can then assign their own OIDs according to normal procedures.
Currently assigned OIDs under the rmon root
At the time of this writing, the following OIDs have been assigned and IANA has picked up this information in their public registry of assigned values.
They are listed as part of the already existing smi numbers registry at: http://www.iana.org/assignments/smi numbers ...
mib 2.rmon were maintained by the RMONMIB Working Group until publication of RFC 3737.
Some (early) assignments may not look all too logical.
That is true, but that is history and cannot be changed.
From now on, only MODULE IDENTITY macro (MIB root) assignments will be made (by IANA) under the 'rmon' node.
32   reserved for raqmonDs M I
How to request a new assignment for a MIB module When anyone is writing a internet draft for which a new assignment is needed/wanted under the rmon OID, then the proper way to do so is as follows:
other normal MODULE IDENTITY stuff ...
This memo describes procedures for IANA assignment of OBJECT IDENTIFIER values, and has no impact on the security of the Internet.
IANA Considerations IANA has picked up the initial set of assignments and integrated them into the existing registry for smi numbers at: http://www.iana.org/assignments/smi numbers
The list is presented in Section 2.
IANA is requested to maintain this registry for future assignments.
New assignments can only be made via Standards Action as described in [RFC2434].
IANA will assign the number as part of the RFC publication process.
