Abstract RPS Security [2] requires certain RPSL [1] objects in the IRR to be hierarchically delegated.
The set of objects that are at the root of this hierarchy needs to be created and digitally signed by IANA.
This paper presents these seed objects and lists operations required from IANA.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.
Initial Seed A public key of IANA needs to be distributed with the software implementations of Distributed Routing Policy System [3].
An initial set of seed objects are needed to be signed with this key.
pgpkey 7F6AA1B9 method: pgp owner:  iana root (est.
71 09 2E 37 71 B8 0A 9C
3B 28 98 B4 F1 21 13 BB certif:
the real IANA key    BEGIN PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK
END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK
mnt iana source: IANA repository:
The above text has no extra white space characters at the end of each line, and contains no tab characters.
All blank line sequences contain only a single blank line.
The page break in the text is also a single blank line.
In this case, we assumed that IANA runs its own repository.
However this is not a requirement.
Instead, it may publish this transaction with an existing routing registry.
2 IANA Assignments Each time IANA makes an assignment, it needs to create inetnum and as block objects as appropriate and digitally sign them using the key in its key cert object.
iana 3 Creating Routing Repositories To enable a new routing repository, a repository object, a maintainer object and a key cert object need to be created and digitally signed by IANA.
END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK
# pointer to key cert object response auth type
pgp key, crypt pw, mail from remarks:
This very first transaction of a new repository is placed in the new repository, not in the IANA repository.
4 Security Considerations Routing policy system security document [2] defines an hierarchical authorization model for objects stored in the routing registries.
This document specifies the seed objects and the actions need to be taken by IANA to maintain the root of that authorization hierarchy.
This whole document is for detailed consideration by IANA.
The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in this document or the extent
to which any license under such rights might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it has made any effort to identify any such rights.
Information on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards track and standards related documentation can be found in BCP 11.
Copies of claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.
The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice this standard.
Please address the information to the IETF Executive Director.
