Abstract This document describes a method for displaying downgraded messages that originally contained internationalized email addresses or internationalized header fields.
The Email Address Internationalization (UTF8SMTP) extension document set [
[RFC5337] expands Email address structure, syntax, and email header format.
To avoid rejection of internationalized email messages, the downgrading mechanism [RFC5504] converts an internationalized message to a traditional email message when a server in the delivery path does not support the UTF8SMTP extension.
The downgraded message is a traditional email message, except the message has "Downgraded " header fields.
A perfect reverse function of the downgrading does not exist because the encoding defined in [RFC2047] is not exactly reversible and "Received" header field downgrading
may remove FOR clause information.
The restoration of the downgrading should be done once at the final destination of the downgraded message such as Mail User Agents (MUAs) or IMAP servers.
This document describes the restoration methods for displaying downgraded messages in MUAs.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
Specialized terms used in this specification are defined in the EAI overview [RFC4952] or in [RFC5321], [RFC5322], or the MIME documents [RFC2045], [RFC2047], [RFC2183], and [RFC2231].
This document depends on [RFC5335] and [RFC5504].
Key words used in those documents are used in this document, too.
The term "MIME decode" is used for both "encoded word" decoding defined by [RFC2047] and MIME parameter value decoding defined by [RFC2231].
3.  Converting Downgraded Message Headers for Display 3.1.
The order of some header fields (such as "Resent  " fields) is significant.
The process of regenerating the original fields from the downgraded ones MUST NOT reorder the fields.
In order to regenerate a field from a specific downgraded header field, it's necessary to find the corresponding replacement in the current message.
If the corresponding field cannot be found, the downgraded header field in question cannot be regenerated and used.
In any case where reconstruction of a particular downgraded header field fails, both header fields (the "downgraded YYY" header field and the "YYY" header field) SHOULD be left in the message as they are.
The MUA MAY choose to communicate the situation to the user (see the "Security Considerations" section).
The Process A MUA MAY decode and regenerate the original header fields of the message (Mail Transport Agents (MTAs) and Mail Delivery Agents (MDAs)
SHOULD NOT attempt to do this; it SHOULD be left to the MUA).
This procedure can be used to approximately reverse the downgrade process, but it will not always construct the original header fields exactly.
Three types of downgraded header fields are described in Section 3 of [RFC5504]: 1.
"Envelope Information Preservation Header Fields", described in RFC5504 Section 3.1 and in Section 3.2.1, below.
"Address Header Fields' Preservation Header Fields", described in RFC5504 Section 3.2 and in Section 3.2.2, below.
"Unknown Header Fields' Preservation Header Fields", described in RFC5504 Section 3.3 and in Section 3.2.3, below.
After processing downgraded header fields, decode all header fields, as described in [RFC2047] and [RFC2231].
No Reconstruction of the Envelope Information Preservation Header Fields Envelope information preservation header fields are new fields that might have been added by the downgrade process.
Because they do not represent fields that appeared in the original message, this process is not applicable to them.
the Address Header Fields' Preservation Header Fields Reconstructing address header fields' preservation header fields is OPTIONAL, and a decision MAY be made on each field, individually.
In particular, it might be less important to process the "Resent  " header fields, so an implementation MAY choose to skip those.
To construct a displayable copy of a header field from one of these downgraded header fields, follow this procedure: 1.
In an edit buffer, create a new header field: (a)  For the field name, remove the "Downgraded " prefix from the downgraded field name.
For example, "Downgraded From" becomes "From", and "Downgraded Resent To" becomes "Resent To".
(b)  For the field value, decode the MIME encoded value of the downgraded field according to [RFC2047].
Apply "Email Header Fields Downgrading", defined in Section 5 of [RFC5504], to the field in the edit buffer.
The process generates two header fields, one is ASCII header field and the other is the Address Header Fields' Preservation Header Field.
Put the generated ASCII header field into comparison buffer 1.
Canonicalize the header field in the comparison buffer 1: 1.
Unfold all header field continuation lines as described in [RFC5322].
If a space character is missing, insert one.
Ensure that there is one space character before and one after each <comment
If a space character is missing, insert one.
Decode each <encoded word> whose charset is "UTF 8".
Convert all sequences of one or more WSP characters to a single space character.
WSP characters here include those before and after a line folding boundary.
Delete all WSP characters at the end of each unfolded header field value.
Delete any WSP characters remaining before and after the colon separating the header field name from the header field value, retaining the colon separator.
Locate the first instance of the corresponding field in the message's headers.
5.  Canonicalize the located field as in step 3, and put the result into comparison buffer 2.
Compare the header field in comparison buffer 1 with the header field in comparison buffer 2.
If they match, go to step 8.
Locate the next instance of the corresponding field in the message's headers.
If one is found, go to step 5.
If none is found, stop: you cannot use this downgraded field because you can't find its replacement in the message.
Replace the located header field with the one in the edit buffer.
You MUST NOT reorder the header fields when you do this; it's important to replace the field in the same place.
Remove the target downgraded header field in the message header.
The Unknown Header Fields' Preservation Header Fields
The unknown header fields' preservation header fields SHOULD be left as they are unless the MUA has special knowledge of a particular field.
An MUA with such knowledge MAY use the procedure similar to the procedure in Section 3.2.2, above, for those fields about which it knows.
(Note that the whitespace canonicalization rule might not be applicable to some header fields.)
Security Considerations While information in any email header should usually be treated with some suspicion, current email systems commonly employ various mechanisms and protocols to make the information more trustworthy.
For example, an organization's boundary MTA can modify "From" lines so that messages arriving from outside the organization are easily distinguishable from internal emails.
As a result of that rewriting, the "From" header field might not match the "Downgraded From" header field.
A MUA MAY emphasize bogus or broken address header fields' preservation header fields found in step 7 of Section 3.2.2.
Hiding the information from the actual header fields when using the "Downgraded " header fields does not cause loss of information if generating MIME decoded header fields in step 1 of Section 3.2.2 and the comparison done in step 7 are successful.
To ensure that no information is lost, a MUA SHOULD have a function that uses the actual message that was received (with/without MIME decoding) to render the message.
We have focused, here, on issues with displaying downgraded messages.
For more discussion of downgraded and internationalized messages in general, see the "Security Considerations" section in [RFC5504] and [RFC4952].
This section shows an example of displaying a downgraded message.
First, an example of the original UTF8SMTP message and its downgraded message are shown.
The example comes from "Example 1" of [RFC5504] and three header fields, "Unknown Field", "Resent From", and "Resent To", are added.
UTF8SMTP message is shown in Figure 1.
MESSAGE ID Mime Version: 1.0 Content Type: text/plain
; charset "UTF 8" Content Transfer Encoding:
NON ASCII SUBJECT Unknown Field:
Unknown From: DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
To: DISPLAY remote1 <NON ASCII remote1@example.net
<NON ASCII remote1@example.net <ASCII remote1@example.net
To: DISPLAY reto <NON ASCII reto@example.net <ASCII
DATE MAIL BODY Figure 1:
Original message A delivered downgraded message is shown in Figure 2.
A Return Path header will be added by the final destination MTA.
Some "Received" header fields may be added.
MESSAGE ID Mime Version: 1.0 Content Type: text/plain
; charset "UTF 8" Content Transfer Encoding:
UTF 8?Q?DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
> Downgraded Resent From:  ?
Date: DATE MAIL BODY Figure 2:
Downgraded message Figure 3 shows the MIME decoded message of Figure 2.
The recipient can read the original "From", "To", "Cc", "Resent From", "Resent To" and "Unknown Field" header fields as "Downgraded From", "Downgraded To", "Downgraded Cc", "Downgraded Resent From", "Downgraded Resent To", and "Downgraded Unknown Field" header fields.
NON ASCII remote1@example.net <ASCII remote1@example.net>
MESSAGE ID Mime Version: 1.0 Content Type: text/plain
; charset "UTF 8" Content Transfer Encoding:
NON ASCII SUBJECT Downgraded Unknown Field:
Unknown From: DISPLAY local <ASCII
Downgraded From: DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
Downgraded To: DISPLAY remote1 <NON ASCII remote1@example.net
> Downgraded Resent From: DISPLAY remote1
<NON ASCII remote1@example.net <ASCII remote1@example.net
To: DISPLAY reto <NON ASCII reto@example.net <ASCII
DATE MAIL BODY Figure 3:
This example shows how to display the message in Figure 2, above, using the process defined in Section 3.
For simplicity, we will show the reconstruction of all the applicable fields at once.
Selecting all Downgraded   fields gives this: Downgraded Mail From:  ?
UTF 8?Q?DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
Downgraded header fields Two of the fields, "Downgraded Mail From" and "Downgraded Rcpt
To", are envelope information preservation header fields, and will not be reconstructed.
One field, "Downgraded Unknown Field", is an unknown header fields' preservation header field and will also not be reconstructed.
That leaves the address header fields' preservation header fields to be reconstructed.
UTF 8?Q?DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
Header fields for the reconstruction Now
, perform step 1 to the downgraded header fields shown in Figure 5 and create an edit buffer.
From: DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
To: DISPLAY remote1 <NON ASCII remote1@example.net
<NON ASCII remote1@example.net <ASCII remote1@example.net
To: DISPLAY reto <NON ASCII reto@example.net <ASCII
Output of step 1 Apply "Email Header Fields Downgrading" to the "edit buffer".
It generates downgraded ASCII header fields and the address header fields' preservation header fields.
The latter fields are the same as the downgraded header fields.
Put the former fields into "comparison buffer 1".
NON ASCII remote2@example.org removed:; Resent From:DISPLAY remote1
Resent To:DISPLAY reto <ASCII reto@example.net
comparison buffer 1: Output of step 3 Perform steps 4 to 6, comparison, for each header field.
Five header fields, "From", "To", "Cc", "Resent From" and "Resent To" fields will match, and we will proceed to step 8.
(Step 7, iteration, does not apply in this example.
Perform step 8, replacing all applicable fields, without changing the order.
Then, do MIME decoding on everything, for display.
To: <NON ASCII remote1@example.net> <ASCII remote1@example.net
MESSAGE ID Mime Version: 1.0 Content Type: text/plain
; charset "UTF 8" Content Transfer Encoding:
NON ASCII SUBJECT Downgraded Unknown Field:
Unknown From: DISPLAY local <NON ASCII
To: DISPLAY remote1 <NON ASCII remote1@example.net
<NON ASCII remote1@example.net <ASCII remote1@example.net
To: DISPLAY reto <NON ASCII reto@example.net <ASCII
As a result, in this simple example, some original header fields are now displayed in their original form.
Differences between Figure 1 and Figure 8 are Return Path, Downgraded Mail
From, Downgraded Rcpt To, and Downgraded Unknown Field.
