Abstract RFC 3580 provides guidelines for the use of the Remote Authentication Dial
In User Service (RADIUS) within IEEE 802 local area networks (LANs).
This document defines additional attributes for use within IEEE 802 networks and clarifies the usage of the EAP Key Name Attribute and the Called Station Id Attribute.
This document updates RFCs 3580 and 4072.
In situations where it is desirable to centrally manage authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA) for IEEE 802
[IEEE 802] networks, deployment of a backend authentication and accounting server is desirable.
In such situations, it is expected that IEEE 802 authenticators will function as AAA clients. "
IEEE 802.1X Remote Authentication Dial
In User Service (RADIUS) Usage Guidelines"
[RFC3580] provides guidelines for the use of the Remote Authentication Dial
In User Service (RADIUS) within networks utilizing IEEE 802 local area networks.
This document defines additional attributes suitable for usage by IEEE 802 authenticators acting as AAA clients.
This document uses the following terms: Access Point (AP)
A Station that provides access to the distribution services via the wireless medium for associated Stations.
The service used to establish Access Point/Station mapping and enable Station invocation of the distribution system services.
Authenticator An entity that requires authentication from the Supplicant.
The authenticator may be connected to the Supplicant at the other end of a point to point LAN segment or wireless link.
An entity that provides an authentication service to an authenticator.
This service verifies the claim of identity made by the Supplicant using the credentials provided by the Supplicant Station (STA)
Any device that contains an IEEE 802.11 conformant Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) interface to the wireless medium (WM).
Supplicant An entity that is being authenticated by an authenticator.
The Supplicant may be connected to the authenticator at one end of a point to point LAN segment or 802.11 wireless link.
In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements of the specification.
Id Attribute allows the RADIUS server to specify the authenticator MAC addresses and/or networks to which the user is allowed to connect.
Attributes MAY be included in an Access Accept, CoA  Request, or Accounting Request packet.
Id Attribute can be useful in situations where pre authentication is supported (e.g., IEEE 802.11 pre authentication).
In these scenarios, a Called Station  Id Attribute typically will not be included within the Access  Request so that the RADIUS server will not know the network that the user is attempting to access.
Id enables the RADIUS server to restrict the networks and attachment points to which the user can subsequently connect.
A summary of the Allowed Called Station Id Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
The String field is one or more octets, specifying a Called  Station Id that the user MAY connect to;
if the Called Station Id that the user connects to does not match one of the Allowed  Called Station
Id Attributes, the Network Access Server (NAS) MUST NOT permit the user to access the network.
In the case of IEEE 802,
the Allowed Called Station I
Within IEEE 802.11 [IEEE 802.11], the Service Set Identifier (SSID) constitutes the network name; within IEEE 802.1X [IEEE 802.1X]
wired networks, the Network Id Name (NID Name) constitutes the network name.
Since a NID Name can be up to 253 octets in length, when used with [IEEE 802.1X] wired networks, there may not be sufficient room within the Allowed
Id Attribute to include both a MAC address and a network name.
However, as the Allowed Called Station Id Attribute is expected to be used largely in wireless access scenarios, this restriction is not considered serious.
The EAP Key Name Attribute, defined in "Diameter Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) Application" [RFC4072], contains the EAP Session Id, as described in "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP
) Key Management Framework" [RFC5247].
Exactly how this attribute is used depends on the link layer in question.
It should be noted that not all link layers use this name.
An EAP Key Name Attribute MAY be included within Access Request, Access Accept, and CoA Request packets.
A summary of the EAP Key
Name Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
String The String field is one or more octets, containing the EAP Session Id, as defined in "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) Key Management Framework" [RFC5247].
Since the NAS operates as a pass through in EAP, it cannot know the EAP Session Id before receiving it from the RADIUS server.
As a result, an EAP Key Name Attribute sent in an Access Request MUST only contain a single NUL character.
A RADIUS server receiving an Access Request with an EAP Key Name Attribute containing anything other than a single NUL character MUST silently discard the attribute.
In addition, the RADIUS server SHOULD include this attribute in an Access Accept or CoA Request only if an EAP Key Name Attribute was present in the Access Request.
Since a NAS will typically only include an EAP  Key Name Attribute in an Access Request in situations where the attribute is required to provision service, if an EAP Key Name Attribute is included in an Access Request but is not present in the Access Accept,
the NAS SHOULD treat the Access Accept as though it were an Access Reject.
If an EAP Key Name Attribute was not present in the Access Request but is included in the Access  Accept, then the NAS SHOULD silently discard the EAP Key Name Attribute.
As noted in Section 6.2.2 of [IEEE 802.1X], the Connectivity Association Key Name (CKN) is derived from the EAP Session Id, and, as described in Section 9.3.3 of [IEEE 802.1X], the CKN is subsequently used in the derivation of the Key Encrypting Key (KEK) and the Integrity Check Value Key (ICK), which protect the Secure Association Keys (SAKs) utilized by Media Access Control Security (MACsec).
As a result, for the NAS to acquire information needed in the MACsec Key Agreement (MKA) exchange, it needs to include the EAP Key Name Attribute in the Access Request and receive it from the RADIUS server in the Access Accept.
Id Attribute contains a Peer Id generated by the EAP method.
Exactly how this name is used depends on the link layer in question.
See [RFC5247] for more discussion.
d Attribute MAY be included in Access Request, Access Accept, and Accounting Request packets.
d Attribute MUST NOT be included in an Access Request; one or more EAP Peer Id
Attributes MAY be included in an Access Accept.
It should be noted that not all link layers use this name, and existing EAP method implementations do not generate it.
Since the NAS operates as a pass through in EAP [RFC3748], it cannot know the EAP Peer Id before receiving it from the RADIUS server.
As a result, an EAP Peer Id Attribute sent in an Access Request MUST only contain a single NUL character.
A home RADIUS server receiving an Access Request with an EAP Peer I
d Attribute containing anything other than a single NUL character MUST silently discard the attribute.
In addition, the home RADIUS server SHOULD include one or more EAP Peer Id Attributes in an Access Accept only if an EAP Peer Id Attribute was present in the Access Request.
If a NAS receives EAP Peer Id Attribute(s) in an Access Accept without having included one in an Access Request, the NAS SHOULD silently discard the attribute(s).
A summary of the EAP Peer Id Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 175 Length > 3
String The String field is one or more octets, containing an EAP Peer Id exported by the EAP method.
For details, see Appendix A of [RFC5247].
A robust implementation SHOULD support the field as undistinguished octets.
Only a single EAP Peer Id may be included per attribute.
Id Attribute contains a Server Id generated by the EAP method.
Exactly how this name is used depends on the link layer in question.
See [RFC5247] for more discussion.
Id Attribute is only allowed in Access Request, Access  Accept, and Accounting Request packets.
More than one EAP Server
d Attribute MUST NOT be included in an Access Request;
one or more EAP Server
Attributes MAY be included in an Access Accept.
It should be noted that not all link layers use this name, and existing EAP method implementations do not generate it.
Since the NAS operates as a pass through in EAP [RFC3748], it cannot know the EAP Server
Id before receiving it from the RADIUS server.
As a result, an EAP Server Id Attribute sent in an Access Request MUST contain only a single NUL character.
A home RADIUS server receiving an Access Request with an EAP Server
d Attribute containing anything other than a single NUL character MUST silently discard the attribute.
In addition, the home RADIUS server SHOULD include this attribute in an Access Accept only if an EAP Server
d Attribute was present in the Access Request.
A summary of the EAP Server Id Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
The String field is one or more octets, containing an EAP Server
Id exported by the EAP method.
For details, see Appendix A of [RFC5247].
A robust implementation SHOULD support the field as undistinguished octets.
Attribute MAY be included in an Access Request or Accounting Request in order to enable the NAS to provide the RADIUS server with the Mobility Domain Identifier (MDID), defined in Section 8.4.2.49 of [IEEE 802.11].
A summary of the Mobility Domain Id Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 177 Length 6 Value
The Value field is four octets, containing a 32 bit unsigned integer.
The two most significant octets MUST be set to zero by the sender and are ignored by the receiver; the two least significant octets contain the Mobility Domain Identifier (MDID) defined in Section 8.4.2.49 of [IEEE 802.11].
This attribute sets the maximum number of seconds that pre
authentication state is required to be kept by the NAS without being utilized within a user session.
For example, when [IEEE 802.11] pre authentication is used, if a user has not attempted to utilize the Pairwise Master Key (PMK) derived as a result of pre authentication within the time specified by the Preauth Timeout Attribute, the PMK MAY be discarded by the Access Point.
However, once the session is underway, the Preauth Timeout Attribute has no bearing on the maximum session time for the user or the maximum time during which key state may be kept prior to re authentication.
This is determined by the Session Timeout Attribute, if present.
A single Preauth Timeout Attribute MAY be included within an Access Accept or CoA Request packet.
A summary of the Preauth  Timeout Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 178 Length 6 Value
The field is 4 octets, containing a 32 bit unsigned integer encoding the maximum time in seconds that pre authentication state should be retained by the NAS.
Name Attribute is utilized by implementations of IEEE 802.1X [IEEE 802.1X] to specify the name of a Network Id (NID Name).
Unlike the IEEE 802.11 SSID (which is a maximum of 32 octets in length), the NID Name may be up to 253 octets in length.
Consequently, if the MAC address is included within the Called  Station Id Attribute, it is possible that there will not be enough remaining space to encode the NID Name as well.
Therefore, when used with IEEE 802.1X [IEEE 802.1X], the Called Station Id Attribute SHOULD contain only the MAC address, with the Network
Name Attribute used to transmit the NID Name.
Name Attribute MUST NOT be used to encode the IEEE 802.11 SSID; as noted in [RFC3580], the Called Station
Id Attribute is used for this purpose.
Name Attribute is permitted within an Access Request, Access Challenge, Access Accept or Accounting  Request packet.
When included within an Access Request packet,
Name Attribute represents a hint of the NID Name to which the Supplicant should be granted access.
When included within an Access Accept packet,
Name Attribute represents the NID Name to which the Supplicant is to be granted access.
When included within an Accounting Request packet,
Name Attribute represents the NID Name to which the Supplicant has been granted access.
A summary of the Network Id Name Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 179 Length > 3
String The String field is one or more octets, containing a NID Name.
For details, see [IEEE 802.1X].
A robust implementation SHOULD support the field as undistinguished octets.
The EAPoL Announcement Attribute contains EAPoL
Announcement Type  Length Value (TLV) tuples defined within Table 11 8 of IEEE 802.1X [IEEE 802.1X].
The acronym "EAPoL" stands for Extensible Authentication Protocol over Local Area Network.
Announcement Attributes are permitted within an Access Request, Access Accept, Access Challenge, Access Reject, Accounting Request, CoA Request, or Disconnect Request packet.
When included within an Access Request packet, EAPoL Announcement Attributes contain EAPoL
Announcement TLVs that the user sent in an EAPoL Announcement.
When included within an Access Accept, Access Challenge, Access Reject, CoA Request or Disconnect Request packet, EAPoL Announcement Attributes contain EAPoL
Announcement TLVs that the NAS is to send to the user in a unicast EAPoL  Announcement.
When sent within an Accounting Request packet, EAPoL Announcement Attributes contain EAPoL
Announcement TLVs that the NAS has most recently sent to the user in a unicast
A summary of the EAPoL Announcement Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
The String field is one or more octets, containing EAPoL  Announcement TLVs in the format defined in Figure 11 8 of Section 11.12 of [IEEE 802.1X].
EAPoL Announcement TLV Type MAY be included within an EAPoL Announcement Attribute, including Organizationally Specific TLVs.
If multiple EAPoL Announcement Attributes are present in a packet, their String fields MUST be concatenated before being parsed for EAPoL Announcement TLVs; this allows EAPoL
Announcement TLVs longer than 253 octets to be transported by RADIUS.
Similarly, EAPoL Announcement TLVs larger than 253 octets MUST be fragmented between multiple EAPoL  Announcement Attributes.
The WLAN HESSID Attribute contains a MAC address that identifies the Homogenous Extended Service Set.
The HESSID is a globally unique identifier that, in conjunction with the SSID, encoded within the Called Station Id Attribute as described in [RFC3580], may be used to provide network identification for a subscription service provider network (SSPN), as described in Section 8.4.2.94 of [IEEE 802.11].
Zero or one WLAN HESSID Attribute is permitted within an Access Request or Accounting Request packet.
A summary of the WLAN HESSID Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
The String field is encoded in uppercase ASCII characters with the octet values separated by dash characters, as described in RFC 3580
[RFC3580], for example, "00 10 A4 23 19 C0". 2.10.
The WLAN Venue Info Attribute identifies the category of venue hosting the WLAN, as defined in Section 8.4.1.34 of [IEEE 802.11].
Zero or more WLAN Venue Info Attributes may be included in an Access Request or Accounting Request.
A summary of the WLAN Venue Info Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 182 Length 6 Value
The Value field is four octets, containing a 32 bit unsigned integer.
The two most significant octets MUST be set to zero by the sender, and are ignored by the receiver; the two least significant octets contain the Venue Group and Venue Type fields.
The Venue Group field is a single octet and describes the broad category of the venue, e.g., "Assembly".
See Section 8.4.1.34 of [IEEE 802.11] for Venue Group codes and descriptions.
The Venue Type field is a single octet and describes the venue in a finer granularity within the Venue Group, e.g., "Library".
See Section 8.4.1.34 of [IEEE 802.11] for Venue Type codes and descriptions.
The WLAN Venue Language Attribute is a string encoded by ISO 14962 1997
[ISO 14962 1997] that defines the language used in the WLAN Venue Name Attribute.
Zero or more WLAN Venue Language Attributes may be included in an Access Request or Accounting  Request, and each one indicates the language of the WLAN Venue  Name Attribute that follows it.
A summary of the WLAN Venue Language Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 183 Length 4 5
The String field is a two  or three character language code selected from ISO 639 [ISO 639].
A two character language code has a zero ("null" in ISO 14962 1997) appended to make it 3 octets in length.
The WLAN Venue Name Attribute provides additional metadata on the Basic Service Set (BSS).
For example, this information may be used to assist a user in selecting the appropriate BSS with which to associate.
Zero or more WLAN Venue Name Attributes may be included in an Access  Request or Accounting Request in the same or different languages.
A summary of the WLAN Venue Name Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 184 Length > 3
String The String field is encoded in UTF 8 and contains the venue's name.
The maximum length of this field is 252 octets.
The WLAN Reason Code Attribute contains information on the reason why a Station has been refused network access and has been disassociated or de authenticated.
This can occur due to policy or for reasons related to the user's subscription.
A WLAN Reason Code Attribute MAY be included within an Access  Reject or Disconnect Request packet, as well as within an Accounting Request packet.
Upon receipt of an Access Reject or Disconnect Request packet containing a WLAN Reason Code Attribute, the WLAN Reason Code value is copied by the Access Point into the Reason Code field of a Disassociation or Deauthentication frame (see Clauses 8.3.3.4 and 8.3.3.12, respectively, in [IEEE 802.11]), which is subsequently transmitted to the Station.
A summary of the WLAN Reason Code Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 185 Length 6 Value
The Value field is four octets, containing a 32 bit unsigned integer.
The two most significant octets MUST be set to zero by the sender and are ignored by the receiver; the two least significant octets contain the Reason Code values defined in Table 8 36 of Section 8.4.1.7 of [IEEE 802.11].
The WLAN Pairwise Cipher Attribute contains information on the pairwise ciphersuite used to establish the robust security network association (RSNA) between the AP and mobile device.
A WLAN  Pairwise Cipher Attribute MAY be included within Access Request and Accounting Request packets.
A summary of the WLAN Pairwise Cipher Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 186 Length 6 Value
The Value field is four octets, containing a 32 bit unsigned integer, in Suite selector format as specified in Figure 8 187 within Section 8.4.2.27.2 of [IEEE 802.11], with values of OUI and Suite Type drawn from Table 8
The WLAN Group Cipher Attribute contains information on the group ciphersuite used to establish the robust security network association (RSNA) between the AP and mobile device.
A WLAN  Group Cipher Attribute MAY be included within Access Request and Accounting Request packets.
A summary of the WLAN Group Cipher Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 187 Length 6 Value
The Value field is four octets, containing a 32 bit unsigned integer, in Suite selector format as specified in Figure 8 187 within Section 8.4.2.27.2 of [IEEE 802.11], with values of OUI and Suite Type drawn from Table 8
The WLAN AKM Suite Attribute contains information on the authentication and key management suite used to establish the robust security network association (RSNA) between the AP and mobile device.
A WLAN AKM Suite Attribute MAY be included within Access Request and Accounting Request packets.
A summary of the WLAN AKM Suite Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 188 Length 6 Value
WLAN Group Mgmt Cipher Description
The WLAN Group Mgmt Cipher Attribute contains information on the group management cipher used to establish the robust security network association (RSNA) between the AP and mobile device.
Group Mgmt Cipher Attribute MAY be included within Access Request and Accounting Request packets.
The presence of the Attribute indicates that the Station negotiated to use management frame protection during association.
A summary of the WLAN Group Mgmt Cipher Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 189 Length 6 Value
The WLAN RF Band Attribute contains information on the radio frequency (RF) band used by the Access Point for transmission and reception of information to and from the mobile device.
Zero or one WLAN RF Band Attribute MAY be included within an Access  Request or Accounting Request packet.
A summary of the WLAN RF Band Attribute format is shown below.
The fields are transmitted from left to right. 0
Type 190 Length 6 Value
The Value field is four octets, containing a 32 bit unsigned integer.
The following table provides a guide to which attributes may be found in which kinds of packets and in what quantity.
Allowed Called Station Id 0
WLAN Group Mgmt Cipher 0
The following table defines the above table entries. 0
This attribute MUST NOT be present in packet. 0
Zero or more instances of this attribute MAY be present in the packet. 0
1   Zero or one instance of this attribute MAY be present in the packet.
This document uses the RADIUS [RFC2865] namespace; see <http://www.iana.org/assignments/radius types
Per this specification, RADIUS attribute types have been assigned for the following attributes:
Security Considerations Since this document describes the use of RADIUS for purposes of authentication, authorization, and accounting in IEEE 802 networks, it is vulnerable to all of the threats that are present in other RADIUS applications.
For a discussion of these threats, see [RFC2607], [RFC2865], [RFC3162], [RFC3579], [RFC3580], and [RFC5176].
In particular, when RADIUS traffic is sent in the clear, the attributes defined in this document can be obtained by an attacker snooping the exchange between the RADIUS client and server.
As a result, RADIUS confidentiality is desirable; for a review of RADIUS security and crypto agility requirements, see [RFC6421].
While it is possible for a RADIUS server to make decisions on whether to accept or reject an Access Request based on the values of the WLAN Pairwise Cipher, WLAN Group Cipher, WLAN AKM Suite, WLAN Group  Mgmt Cipher, and WLAN RF Band Attributes, the value of doing this is limited.
In general, an Access Reject should not be necessary, except where Access Points and Stations are misconfigured so as to enable connections to be made with unacceptable values.
Rather than rejecting access on an ongoing basis, users would be better served by fixing the misconfiguration.
Where access does need to be rejected, the user should be provided with an indication of why the problem has occurred, or else they are likely to become frustrated.
For example, if the values of the WLAN  Pairwise Cipher, WLAN Group Cipher, WLAN AKM Suite, or WLAN Group
Mgmt Cipher Attributes included in the Access Request are not acceptable to the RADIUS server, then a WLAN Reason Code Attribute with a value of 29
(Requested service rejected because of service provider ciphersuite or AKM requirement)
SHOULD be returned in the Access Reject.
Similarly, if the value of the WLAN RF Band Attribute included in the Access Request is not acceptable to the RADIUS server, then a WLAN Reason Code Attribute with a value of 11
(Disassociated because the information in the Supported Channels element is unacceptable) SHOULD be returned in the Access Reject.
