Abstract Pre Congestion Notification (PCN) is a means for protecting quality of service for inelastic traffic admitted to a Diffserv domain.
The overall PCN architecture is described in RFC 5559.
This memo describes the requirements for the signaling applied within the PCN  domain:
(1) PCN feedback information is carried from the PCN egress  node to the Decision Point; (2) the Decision Point may ask the PCN  ingress node to measure, and report back, the rate of sent PCN  traffic between that PCN ingress node and PCN egress node.
The Decision Point may be either collocated with the PCN ingress node or a centralized node (in the first case, (2) is not required).
The signaling requirements pertain in particular to two edge behaviors, Controlled Load (CL) and Single Marking (SM).
The main objective of Pre Congestion Notification (PCN) is to support the quality of service (QoS) of inelastic flows within a Diffserv domain in a simple, scalable, and robust fashion.
Two mechanisms are used: admission control and flow termination.
Admission control is used to decide whether to admit or block a new flow request, while flow termination is used in abnormal circumstances to decide whether to terminate some of the existing flows.
To support these two features, the overall rate of PCN traffic is metered on every link in the domain, and PCN packets are appropriately marked when certain configured rates are exceeded.
These configured rates are below the rate of the link, thus providing notification to boundary nodes about overloads before any congestion occurs (hence "pre congestion" notification).
The PCN egress nodes measure the rates of differently marked PCN traffic in periodic intervals and report these rates to the Decision Points for admission control and flow termination; the Decision Points use these rates to make decisions.
The Decision Points may be collocated with the PCN ingress nodes, or their function may be implemented in a centralized node.
For more details see [RFC5559], [RFC6661], and [RFC6662].
This memo specifies the requirements on signaling protocols:  to carry reports from a PCN egress node to the Decision Point,  to carry requests, from the Decision Point to a PCN ingress node, that trigger the PCN ingress node to measure the PCN sent rate,  to carry reports, from a PCN ingress node to the Decision Point.
The latter two messages are only needed if the Decision Point and PCN ingress node are not collocated.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
Signaling Requirements for Messages from the PCN Egress Nodes to Decision Point(s)
The PCN egress node measures per ingress egress aggregate the rates of differently marked PCN traffic in regular intervals.
The measurement intervals are recommended to take a fixed value between 100 ms and 500 ms; see [RFC6661] and [RFC6662].
At the end of each measurement interval, the PCN egress node calculates the congestion  level estimate (CLE) based on these quantities.
The PCN egress node MAY be configured to record a set of identifiers of PCN flows for which it received excess traffic marked packets during the last measurement interval.
The latter may be useful to perform flow termination in networks with multipath routing.
At the end of each measurement interval, or less frequently if "optional report suppression" is activated (see [RFC6661] and [RFC6662]), the PCN egress node sends a report to the Decision Point.
For the SM edge behavior, the report MUST contain:  the identifier of the PCN ingress node and the identifier of the PCN egress node (typically their IP addresses); together they specify the ingress egress aggregate to which the report refers,  the rate of not marked PCN traffic (NM rate) in octets/second, and  the rate of PCN marked traffic (PM rate) in octets/second.
For the CL edge behavior, the report MUST contain:  the identifier of the PCN ingress node and the identifier of the PCN egress node (typically their IP addresses); together they specify the ingress egress aggregate to which the report refers,  the rate of not marked PCN traffic (NM rate) in octets/second,  the rate of threshold marked PCN traffic (ThM rate) in octets/second, and  the rate of excess traffic marked traffic (ETM rate) in octets/second.
The number format and the rate units used by the signaling protocol will limit the maximum rate that PCN can use.
If signaling space is tight, it might be reasonable to impose a limit, but any such limit may impose unnecessary constraints in the future.
The signaling report can either be sent directly to the Decision Point or it can "piggy back", i.e., be included within some other message that passes through the PCN egress node and then reaches the Decision Point.
As described in [RFC6661], PCN reports from the PCN egress node to the Decision Point may contain flow identifiers for individual flows within an ingress egress aggregate that have recently experienced excess marking.
Hence, the PCN report messages used by the PCN CL edge behavior MUST be capable of carrying sequences of octet strings constituting such identifiers.
Signaling messages SHOULD have a higher priority and a lower drop precedence than PCN packets (see [RFC5559]) in order to deliver them quickly and to prevent them from being dropped in case of overload.
The load generated by the signaling protocol SHOULD be minimized.
We give three methods that may help to achieve that goal: 1.
piggy backing the reports by the PCN egress nodes to the Decision Point(s) onto other signaling messages that are already in place, 2.
reducing the amount of reports to be sent by optional report suppression, or 3.
combining reports for different ingress egress aggregates in a single message (if they are for the same Decision Point).
As PCN reports are sent regularly, additional reliability mechanisms are not needed.
This also holds in the presence of optional report suppression, as reports are sent periodically if actions by the Decision Point(s) are needed; see [RFC6661] and [RFC6662].
Signaling Requirements for Messages between Decision Point(s) and PCN Ingress Nodes
Through request response signaling between the Decision Point and PCN ingress node, the Decision Point requests and in response the PCN ingress node measures and reports the PCN sent rate for a specific ingress egress aggregate.
Signaling is needed only if the Decision Point and PCN ingress node are not collocated.
The request MUST contain:  the identifier of the PCN ingress node and the identifier of the PCN egress node; together they determine the ingress egress  aggregate for which the PCN sent rate is requested, and  the identifier of the Decision Point that requests the PCN sent  rate.
The report MUST contain:  the PCN sent rate in octets/second, and  the identifier of the PCN ingress node and the identifier of the PCN egress node.
The request MUST be addressed to the PCN ingress node, and the report MUST be addressed to the Decision Point that requested it.
Because they are sent only when flow termination is needed (which is an urgent action), the request and the report SHOULD be sent with high priority, with a lower drop precedence than PCN packets, and in a reliable manner.
Note that a complete system description for a PCN domain with centralized Decision Point includes the signaling from Decision Point to the PCN ingress nodes to control flow admission and termination.
However, this is a known problem (with solutions provided in [RFC3084] and [RFC5431], for example), and it lies outside the scope of the present document.
Security Considerations [RFC5559] provides a general description of the security considerations for PCN.
This memo relies on the security related requirements of the PCN signaling, provided in [RFC5559].
In particular, the signaling between the PCN boundary nodes must be protected from attacks.
For example, the recipient needs to validate that the message is indeed from the node that claims to have sent it.
Possible measures include digest authentication and protection against replay and man in the middle attacks.
Specifically for the generic aggregate RSVP protocol, additional protection methods against security attacks are described in [RFC4860].
