Abstract This document defines the text/red MIME sub type.
"Red" is short for redundant.
The actual RTP packetization for this MIME type is specified in RFC 2198.
Introduction Text is an important component of any multimedia communication system.
Like audio, the transport of text can benefit from the use of redundancy in order to improve reliability and end user experience.
RFC 2198 [1] defines an RTP [2] payload format for redundant audio data.
The format defined in that document is quite suitable for providing redundancy for text, as well as audio.
[8] specifies one usage of RFC 2198 and the text/red MIME type for the transport of redundant text data.
This memo provides the MIME sub type registration information for text/red.
While this document focuses on the use of this MIME sub  type in SDP [5]
, the application of this MIME sub type is not restricted to SDP.
Conventions Used in This Document
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "
SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3].
One new MIME sub type has been registered by the IANA, as described below: MIME media type name:
RED Required parameters: rate: the RTP clock rate of the payload carried within the RTP packet.
Typically, this rate is 1000, but other rates MAY be specified.
This parameter MUST be set equal to the clock rate of the text payload format carried as the primary encoding.
a comma separated ordered list of RTP payload types enumerating the primary, secondary, etc., in accordance with RFC 2198.
Because comma is a special character, the list MUST be a quoted string (enclosed in double quotes).
For static payload types, each list element is simply the type number.
For dynamic payload types, each list element is a mapping of the dynamic payload type number to an embedded MIME content type specification for the payload format corresponding to the dynamic payload type.
If the content type string does not include a comma, it MAY still be quoted.
Because it is part of the list, which must itself be a quoted string, the quotation marks MUST be quoted with backslash quoting as specified in RFC 2045 [4].
If the content type string itself contains a quoted string, then the requirement for backslash quoting is recursively applied.
ptime, maxptime (these attributes are originally defined in RFC 2327 [5] and RFC 3267 [6], respectively
) Restrictions on Usage: This type is defined only for transfer via RTP.
It shall not be defined for a storage format.
Encoding considerations: See restrictions on Usage above; this section is included per the requirements in RFC 3555 [7].
: Refer to section 5 of RFC 4102.
none Published specification: RFC 2198 Applications which use this media type:
Text streaming and conferencing tools.
none Person & email address to contact for further information:
Paul E. Jones E mail:
Change Controller: AVT Working Group delegated from the IESG 4.
The information carried in the MIME media type specification has a specific mapping to fields in the Session Description Protocol (SDP) [5], which is commonly used to describe RTP sessions.
When SDP is used to specify sessions employing the RFC 2198 in a text session, the mapping is as follows:
The MIME type ("text") goes in SDP
"m " as the media name.
The value of the parameter "rate" goes in SDP "a rtpmap".
The MIME subtype (RED) goes in SDP "a rtpmap" as the encoding name.
The parameters "ptime" and "maxptime" go in the SDP "a ptime" and "a maxptime" attributes, respectively.
The pt parameter is mapped to an a fmtp attribute by eliminating the parameter name (pt) and changing the commas to slashes.
For example, 'pt "101,102"' maps to 'a fmtp:99 101/102',
where   '99' is the payload type of the redundancy frames.
The level of redundancy is shown by the number of elements in the payload type list.
Any dynamic payload type in the list MUST be represented by its payload type number and not by its content type.
The mapping of payload types to the content type is done using the normal SDP procedures with "a rtpmap".
An example of SDP is:
m text 11000 RTP/AVP 98 100
a rtpmap:100 red/1000 a fmtp:100 98/98 For each redundancy payload type defined, the ordering of the primary and redundancy encoding(s) is fixed.
If more than one combination of primary and redundancy encoding(s) is desired, multiple redundancy payload types needs to be defined.
The security considerations listed in RFC 2198 apply.
Further, it should be understood that text data, perhaps even more so than audio data, is susceptible to unwanted modification that may lead to undesired results.
To prevent modification of the primary, secondary, or header information, payload integrity protection over at least the complete RTP packet is RECOMMENDED, for example using SRTP [9].
