Inc. OSPF Standardization Report Status of this Memo
This memo provides information for the Internet community.
It does not	specify	an Internet standard of	any kind.
Distribution	of this memo is unlimited.
This memo documents	how the	requirements for advancing a routing protocol to	Full Standard, set out in [Ref2], have been met	for OSPFv2.
Please send	comments to ospf@gated.cornell.edu.
Introduction OSPFv2, herein abbreviated simply as OSPF, is an IPv4 routing protocol documented	in [Ref8].
OSPF	is a link state	routing protocol.
It is designed to be run	internal to a single Autonomous System.
Each OSPF router maintains	an identical database describing the	Autonomous System's topology.
From this database, a routing table is calculated	by constructing	a shortest path	tree.
OSPF features include the following: o
OSPF responds quickly to topology changes, expending a minimum of network bandwidth in	the process.
OSPF routing exchanges can be authenticated, providing routing security.
An area	routing	capability is provided,	enabling an Autonomous system to be split into	a two level hierarchy to further reduce the amount of routing protocol traffic.
OSPF allows import of external routing information into	the Autonomous System, including a tagging feature that can	be exploited to exchange extra information	at the AS boundary (see [Ref7]).
An analysis	of OSPF	together with a	more detailed description of OSPF features was originally provided in [Ref6], as	a part of promoting OSPF to Draft Standard status.
The analysis of OSPF remains unchanged.
Two additional major features have been developed for	OSPF since the protocol	achieved Draft Standard	status:	the Point to MultiPoint	interface and Cryptographic Authentication.
These features are described in Sections 2.1 and 2.2 respectively of this memo.
The	OSPF MIB is documented in [Ref4].
It is	currently at Draft Standard status.
Modifications since	Draft Standard status OSPF became	a Draft	Standard with the release of RFC 1583 [Ref3].
Implementations of the new specification in	[Ref8] are backward  compatible with RFC	1583.
The differences between the two documents are	described in the Appendix Gs of
These differences	are listed briefly below.
Two major features were also added, the Point to MultiPoint interface and Cryptographic Authentication, which are described	in separate sections.
o	Configuration requirements for OSPF area address ranges	have been relaxed to	allow greater flexibility in area assignment.
See Section G.3	of [Ref1] for details.
The OSPF flooding algorithm was	modified to a)
improve database convergence in networks	with low speed links b)
a problem	where unnecessary LSA retransmissions could occur as a result of differing clock granularities, c) remove
race conditions between the flooding	of MaxAge LSAs and the Database Exchange process, d) clarify the use of
the MinLSArrival constant, and e) rate limit the	response to less recent	LSAs received via flooding.
See Sections G.4 and G.5 of [Ref1] and Section	G.1 of [Ref8] for details.
To resolve the long standing confusion regarding representation of point to point links	in OSPF, the specification now optionally allows advertisement	of a stub link to a point to  point link's subnet, ala RIP.
See Section G.6 of [Ref1].
Several	problems involving advertising the same	external route from multiple areas were found and fixed, as described in Section	G.7 of [Ref1] and Section G.2 of [Ref8].
Without the fixes, persistent routing loops	could form in certain such configurations.
Note that one of the fixes was not backward  compatible, in that mixing routers implementing	the fixes with those implementing just	RFC 1583 could cause loops not present in an RFC 1583 only configuration.
This	caused an RFC1583Compatibility global configuration parameter to be added, as described in	Section	C.1 of [Ref1].
In order to deal with high delay links,	retransmissions	of initial	Database Description packets no	longer reset an	OSPF adjacency.
In order to detect link	MTU mismatches,	which can cause	problems both in	IP forwarding and in the OSPF routing protocol itself, MTU was	added to OSPF's	Database Description packets.
Neighboring routers refuse to bring up an OSPF adjacency unless they agree on their common link's MTU.
The TOS	routing	option was deleted from	OSPF.
However, for backward compatibility the formats of OSPF's various LSAs remain unchanged, maintaining the ability to specify TOS metrics in router LSAs, summary LSAs, ASBR summary LSAs, and AS external  LSAs.
OSPF's routing table lookup algorithm was changed to reflect current	practice.
The "best match" routing table entry is now always selected	to be the one providing	the most specific (longest) match.
See Section G.4 of [Ref8] for details.
Point to MultiPoint interface The Point to MultiPoint	interface was added as an alternative to OSPF's NBMA interface when running OSPF	over non broadcast subnets.
Unlike	the NBMA interface, Point to MultiPoint	does not require	full mesh connectivity over the	non broadcast subnet.
Point to MultiPoint is less efficient than NBMA, but is	easier to configure
(in fact, it can be self configuring) and is more robust than NBMA, tolerating all failures within the non  broadcast subnet.
For more information	on the Point to  MultiPoint interface, see Section G.2 of [Ref1].
There are at least six independent implementations of the Point to MultiPoint interface.
Interoperability	has been demonstrated between at	least two pairs	of implementations: between	3com and Bay Networks, and between cisco and Cascade.
Authentication Non trivial authentication was added to	OSPF with the development of the Cryptographic Authentication	type.
This authentication type uses any keyed message digest algorithm, with explicit instructions included for	the use	of MD5.
For more information on OSPF authentication, see	Section	4.
There are at least three independent implementations of	the OSPF Cryptographic authentication type.
Interoperability has	been demonstrated between the implementations from cisco and	Cascade.
Updated implementation and deployment experience When OSPF was promoted to Draft Standard Status, a report was issued documenting	current	implementation and deployment experience (see [Ref6]).
That report is now	quite dated.
In	an attempt to get more current data, a questionnaire was sent to OSPF mailing list	in January 1996.
Twelve responses were	received, from 11 router vendors and	1 manufacturer of test equipment.
These	responses represented 6 independent	implementations.
A tabulation of the results are presented below.
Table 1 indicates the implementation, interoperability and deployment of the major OSPF functions.
The	number in each column represents the number of responses in the affirmative.
1 Point to Multipoint	ifc.
: Implementation of OSPF features Table 2 indicates the size of the OSPF routing domains that	vendors have tested.
For each size parameter, the number of	responders and the	range of responses (minimum, mode, mean	and maximum) are listed.
Max routers in single area
K    10K    30K Table 2:	OSPF domain sizes tested Table 3
indicates the size of the OSPF routing domains that	vendors have deployed in real networks.
For	each size parameter, the number of responders and the range	of responses (minimum, mode, mean and maximum) are listed.
510    1000 Max routers in single area
OSPF domain sizes deployed In an attempt to ascertain the extent to which OSPF	is currently deployed, vendors were also	asked in January 1998 to provide deployment estimates.
Four vendors of OSPF routers responded, with a total estimate of 182,000 OSPF routers in service, organized into 4300 separate OSPF routing domains.
All	OSPF protocol exchanges	are authenticated.
OSPF	supports multiple types of authentication; the type of authentication in use can	be configured on a per network segment basis.
One of OSPF's authentication types, namely the Cryptographic authentication option, is believed	to be secure against passive attacks and provide significant	protection against active attacks.
When	using the Cryptographic authentication option, each router appends a "message digest" to its transmitted OSPF packets.
Receivers then use	the shared secret key and received digest to verify that each received OSPF packet	is authentic.
The	quality	of the security	provided by the	Cryptographic authentication option depends completely on	the strength of
(MD5 is currently the only	message	digest algorithm specified), the strength of the key being	used, and the correct implementation of the security mechanism in	all communicating OSPF implementations.
It also requires that all parties maintain the secrecy of the	shared secret key.
None of the	OSPF authentication types provide confidentiality.
Nor do they protect against traffic analysis.
Key management is	also not addressed by the OSPF specification.
For	more information, see Sections 8.1, 8.2, and Appendix D	of [Ref1].
Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2178, July 1997.
[Ref2]  Hinden, B.,	"Internet Routing Protocol Standardization Criteria", RFC 1264, October 1991.
[Ref3]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", RFC 1583, March 1994.
[Ref4]  Baker, F., and R. Coltun, "OSPF Version 2 Management Information	Base", RFC 1850, November 1995.
[Ref5]  Moy, J., "OSPF Protocol Analysis", RFC 1245, August	1991.
[Ref6]  Moy, J., "Experience with the OSPF Protocol", RFC 1246, August 1991.
[Ref7]  Varadhan, K., Hares	S., and	Y. Rekhter, "BGP4/IDRP for IP
OSPF Interaction",	RFC 1745, December 1994.
[Ref8]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.
Security Considerations Security considerations are	addressed in Section 4 of this memo.
Author's Address John Moy Ascend Communications, Inc. 1
, MA 01886 Phone: 978
952 1367 Fax:   978 392 2075 EMail:
Full Copyright Statement Copyright (C)
This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works
that comment on	or otherwise explain	it or assist in	its implementation may be prepared, copied,	published and distributed, in whole or in part,	without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this	paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works.
However, this document itself may not be modified in any	way, such as by	removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed	for the	purpose	of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures	for copyrights defined	in the Internet	Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than English.
The limited permissions	granted	above are perpetual and	will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or	assigns.
This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and	THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT
THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY	RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED	WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
