Abstract The Seamoby Candidate Access Router Discovery (CARD) protocol and the Context Transfer Protocol (CXTP) are experimental protocols designed to accelerate IP handover between wireless access routers.
These protocols require IANA allocations for ICMP type and options, Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)
Payload Protocol Identifiers, port numbers, and registries for certain formatted message options.
This document contains instructions to IANA about which allocations are required for the Seamoby protocols.
The ICMP subtype extension format for Seamoby has been additionally designed so that it can be utilized by other experimental mobility protocols, and the SCTP port number is also available for other experimental mobility protocols.
The Seamoby Candidate Access Router Discovery (CARD) protocol [RFC4066] and the Context Transfer Protocol (CXTP)
[RFC4067] are experimental protocols designed to accelerate IP handover between wireless access routers.
These protocols require IANA allocations for ICMP options and type, SCTP Payload Protocol Identifiers, port numbers, and the establishment of registries for certain formatted message options.
Because the protocols are experimental, there is no guarantee that they will ever see widespread deployment in their current form.
Consequently, it is prudent to conserve Internet numbering resources that might be needed for other protocols that could see wider deployment.
This document contains instructions to IANA for the Seamoby protocols.
Additionally, the ICMP subtype extension format has been designed so that it could be used by other experimental mobility protocols.
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
Allocation policy names Specification Required, IETF Consensus Action, and Designated Expert are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2434
Common IPv4 and IPv6 Allocations IANA has assigned SCTP port numbers 5090 for use by [RFC4066] and 5091 for use of [RFC4067].
See Section 5.2.1 of [RFC4066] for a description of the inter access router CARD protocol use of SCTP, and Section 3.1 of [RFC4067] for a description of the inter access router CXTP use of SCTP.
IPv4 Allocations IANA has assigned ICMP type 41 for IPv4 identifying ICMP messages utilized by experimental mobility protocols such as Seamoby.
See Section 5.1.1 of [RFC4066] for a description of experimental mobility CARD ICMP messages and Section 3.2 of [RFC4067] for the CXTP ICMP messages, specified by Seamoby.
See Section 9 of this document for a description of the experimental mobility protocol ICMP subtype format and initial allocations.
Allocations IANA has assigned ICMP type code 150 for IPv6 identifying ICMP messages utilized by experimental mobility protocols such as Seamoby.
See Section 5.1.1 of [RFC4066] for a description of experimental mobility CARD ICMP messages and Section 3.2 of [RFC4067] for the CXTP ICMP messages, specified by Seamoby.
See Section 9 of this document for a description of the experimental mobility protocol subtype format and initial allocations.
Candidate Access Router Discovery Protocol Registries For CARD
, two new registries are created that IANA is to maintain, named: 1)
The AVP Type Registry, 2)
The Layer 2 Access Technology Identifier Registry.
These are described in the following subsections.
The AVP Type Registry allows for future expansion of the CARD AVP type space to include new AVPs.
AVP Type codes are 16 bit unsigned integers.
See Section 5.1.4 of [RFC4066] for a description of AVPs.
The registry SHALL be initially populated with the following table:
0x00 Future allocations of AVP type codes will be made through Expert Review, as defined in RFC 2434.
Layer 2 Access Technology Identifier Registry
The Layer 2 Access Technology Identifier registry allows the registration of type codes to uniquely identify specific access technologies in the L2 Type field of the CARD L2 ID sub option.
L2 ID codes are 16 bit unsigned integers.
See Section 5.1.3.1 of [RFC4066] for a description of the CARD L2 ID sub option.
The registry SHALL initially be populated with the following table:
0x08 Future allocation of Layer 2 Access Technology identifiers will be made by the method of Specification Required, as defined in RFC 2434.
All requests for allocations MUST be accompanied by a reference to a technical document in which the design of the Layer 2 access technology is described.
Context Transfer Profile Type Registry CXTP requires IANA to maintain a registry named the Context Transfer Profile Type Registry, which is a registry of context Feature Profile Type identifiers.
Feature Profile Type identifiers are 16 bit unsigned integers that identify particular types of feature contexts.
See Section 2.4 of [RFC4067] for a description of how contexts are carried in CXTP.
Future allocations of Feature Profile Type codes will be made through Expert Review, as defined in RFC 2434.
Context Transfer Protocol Authorization Token Calculation Algorithm
In Section 2.5.4 of [RFC4067], CXTP requires an authorization token calculation algorithm indicator.
Currently, the only indicator defined is 0x1, for HMAC SHA1.
Additional algorithms may be added by the method of Specification Required [RFC2434].
ICMP Experimental Mobility Subtype Format and Registry
The ICMP Experimental Mobility Type is utilized by CARD and CXTP in the following way.
The interpretation of the Code field is as defined by the relevant ICMP standard for IPv4 and IPv6, and does not change.
The protocols are free to utilize the Code for their own purposes.
The ICMP Experimental Mobility Type defines a one octet subtype field within the ICMP Reserved field that identifies the specific protocol.
For IPv4, 41; for IPv6 150 Code
As defined by the relevant ICMP specification and free for use by the Experimental Mobility protocol.
One octet subtype code identifying the Experimental Mobility protocol
Unless otherwise defined by the Experimental Mobility protocol, set to zero by the sender and ignored by the receiver.
IANA SHALL maintain a registry of one octet unsigned integer subtype codes for the Experimental Mobility protocols called the Experimental Mobility Protocol Subtype Registry.
Initial allocations in the registry SHALL be established as follows:
Subsequent allocations of subtype codes SHALL be made by the method of Specification Required and IESG Review as defined in RFC 2434.
Usage by Other Experimental Mobility Protocols
The ICMP Experimental Mobility type code is available for other experimental mobility protocols to use.
Other experimental mobility protocols MAY define additional ICMP messages that use code points under the Experimental Mobility ICMP type.
There are no security considerations associated with this document.
This entire document is about IANA considerations.
